Source URL: https://humanservices.arkansas.gov/wp-content/uploads/Packet-for-Posting-Medical-Services-Policy-Section-A-116-H-100-H-400-H-600-and-H-700.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-09-23
Note: fetched with curl (simple user agent) because the Python fetcher got 403

MEDICAL SERVICES POLICY MANUAL, SECTION X
                                          Error! No text of specified style in document.

                                                 A-116 Premiums For The Adult Expansion Group




A-116 Premiums For The Adult Expansion Group
MS Manual 08/29/22

A program participant who has income of at least 100% of the federal poverty level will pay a
premium of no more than 2% of their income to a health insurance carrier.
Individuals who are medically frail and receiving traditional Medicaid will not be required to pay
a premium.
MEDICAL SERVICES POLICY MANUAL, SECTION H
                                                 H-100 Long-Term Services and Supports




H-100 Long-Term Services and Supports
MS Manual 08/29/2022

The policies located in Section H of this manual describe programs and procedures that are
unique to the Long Term Services and Supports eligibility groups. These sections include:

    1. Income Trusts (MS H-110-116);
    2. Spousal Impoverishment Rules (MS H-200);
    3. Transfer of Resources (MS H-300);
    4. Post-Eligibility rules (MS H-400);
    5. Long-Term Care Insurance Partnership Program (MS H-500);
    6. Estate Recovery (MS H-600); and
    7. Undue Hardship Waiver (MS H-700).

H-110 Income Trusts
MS Manual 08/29/2022

An individual with income in excess of the income limit may establish an income trust for the
purpose of becoming Health Care eligible. This type of trust is commonly referred to as a Miller
Income Trust.

H-111 Requirements for an Income Trust
MS Manual 08/29/2022

A Miller Income Trust must meet the following conditions:

    1. Terms and Other Conditions

        The trust must be irrevocable. It can be terminated or amended only by mutual
        agreement between the Department of Human Services (DHS) and the trustee.

        The trust may be used to establish Health Care eligibility for individuals determined to
        be medically in need of care in a nursing facility or assisted living facility or PACE.

        The trust must have been created either by the individual or by the individual’s child,
        spouse, sibling, attorney-in-fact or Power of Attorney, guardian, or representative payee
        as determined by the Social Security Administration. Establishment of a Miller Income
        Trust by these individuals previously listed will be considered as valid for the purposes
        of Health Care eligibility.

        The trust must have been established on or after August 11, 1993.
MEDICAL SERVICES POLICY MANUAL, SECTION H
                                               H-100 Long-Term Services and Supports



     The trust can only be funded from Social Security, pension, and all other income payable
     to an individual, including income earned by the trust account. If assets other than
     income, such as real or personal property, are placed in the trust, the individual cannot
     be eligible for facility services under the income trust provisions.

     The trust must contain a provision that all assets remaining in the trust at the
     individual’s death will be transferred to DHS up to an amount equal to medical
     payments made by DHS on behalf of the individual subsequent to establishment of the
     trust.

  2. Consideration of Income

     An individual with gross monthly countable income (excluding VA A&A and CME/UME)
     that exceeds the federal cap of three (3) times the SSI payment for an individual living in
     their own home, may establish eligibility through an income trust.

     Individuals are not required to place all their income into a Miller Income Trust to be
     eligible for Health Care. Any income other than VA A&A and CME/UME that exceeds the
     income limit must be placed into the trust.

     Income received by an individual and placed in the trust, or an individual’s income paid
     to the trust by direct deposit, is not countable income for eligibility purposes but will be
     countable toward patient liability. Patient liability is calculated from all gross income
     regardless of whether or not it is placed in the trust.

     The income (other than income accumulated by the trust) must be income payable to
     the individual, and the income must first be received by the individual before being
     placed in the trust. If the individual assigns the right to receive any or all of the income
     to the trust, the income assigned is no longer considered income to the individual under
     SSI rules. Such an assignment will be considered a disqualifying transfer. However, for
     purposes of this section, if an individual authorizes the income to be paid into the trust
     by direct deposit from the payor, the direct deposit will not be considered an
     assignment (disqualifying transfer).

     Income in excess of the income limit that is received directly by an individual must be
     transferred to the trust immediately upon receipt. Any income that is not transferred
     into a Miller Income Trust in the month it is received will be counted when determining
     eligibility.

     If in any month the individual’s income that exceeds the income limit is not placed in the
     trust, the individual is not eligible for Health Care benefits or vendor payment in that
     month.
MEDICAL SERVICES POLICY MANUAL, SECTION H
                                              H-100 Long-Term Services and Supports



     The income must be placed into and maintained in a single trust account.

     If an individual receives income on an irregular basis (such as royalty or farm rental
     income or lump sum payments such as SSA retroactive benefits) the income must be
     placed into the trust when it is received.

     If an individual receives income paid jointly to themselves and another person(s), the
     facility resident’s share of the income must be separated from the shares owned by the
     other person(s) before depositing the facility resident’s share in the trust account. No
     income belonging to any other individual may be placed in the income trust of a Health
     Care recipient.

  3. Fees and Other Disbursements

     When no relatives are available to serve as the trustee, a commercial institution such as
     a bank can be named as trustee. Commercially reasonable administrative fees that are
     charged by the commercial institution may be allowed as trustee fees. The fee will be
     considered commercially reasonable if the fee is consistent with administrative fees
     charged to other customers for similar services. Trustee fees will not be allowed except
     in these instances. The bank service charges for maintaining the bank account are
     allowable fees.

  4. Trustee Responsibilities

     A trustee may serve without bond or supervision of any court.

     Prior to a distribution from the trust, the trustee must notify the eligibility worker
     responsible for the case of any fees, income taxes, or other payments that must be
     made from the trust before these disbursements can be made. The advance notice must
     be made no later than the month that precedes the month in which the disbursements
     will be made.

     After certification of the case, no disbursements of any kind can be made by the trustee
     until the trustee has been provided a current Notice of Action with the post-eligibility
     budget completed by the system. (See MS H-410.)

     Any disbursements made that are not for the benefit of the recipient, the community
     spouse, or other dependents as specified on the Notice of Action and in the electronic
     record will be considered a transfer of resources, and a penalty period may be applied.
MEDICAL SERVICES POLICY MANUAL, SECTION H
                                                  H-100 Long-Term Services and Supports


        Payments must be made from the trust each month only in the amounts specified on
        the Notice of Action and in the electronic record. The payments must be made directly
        to the designated recipient, i.e., to the recipient or responsible person for the personal
        needs allowance (PNA); to the community spouse or dependent(s) for their allowances;
        to the recipient or responsible party for the recipient’s non-covered medical expenses;
        to the recipient of court-ordered child support or court-ordered spousal support or
        both; and to the facility for the patient’s share of cost.

        While an individual is receiving Health Care benefits in a facility, no disbursements other
        than those specified on the Notice of Action and in the electronic record may be made.

        The trust records shall be open to inspection and for copying by DHS, and periodic
        reporting may be required at the discretion of DHS.

        If the trustee becomes aware of any change in circumstances that will affect the
        recipient’s eligibility or the amounts being distributed monthly from the trust, the
        trustee shall be responsible for notifying the eligibility worker of such changes. Changes
        to be reported include without limitation income changes, increase or decrease of cost
        of non-covered medical expenses, recipient death or departure from the facility,
        community spouse entering a facility, etc.

        The trustee must notify the eligibility worker if in any month the funds are not disbursed
        according to the Notice of Action or if the balance in the trust account exceeds the
        maximum allowed as specified in MS H-113, Post-Eligibility Procedures, so that the
        worker can adjust the facility payment(s) for the month(s) in which the vendor payment
        is affected.

H-112 Income Trust Application Process
Refer to Health Care Procedures Manual for more information.
MS Manual 08/29/2022

Individuals with income above the federal cap who inquire regarding Health Care eligibility in a
facility or for the Waiver program will be given information regarding eligibility limits under the
income trust provisions along with a resource assessment (Re. MS E- 500) if requested.
Individuals with excess resources cannot establish eligibility through an income trust.

NOTE: If an individual receives income from a LTC insurance policy that puts them over the
income limit, an income trust is not required unless the other countable income, without
counting the LTC insurance payments, puts them over the income limit.
MEDICAL SERVICES POLICY MANUAL, SECTION H
                                                 H-100 Long-Term Services and Supports


H-113 Post-Eligibility Procedures
MS Manual 08/29/2022

   1. Post-Eligibility Consideration of Income

       The total net countable income of an individual will be included in the post-eligibility
       consideration. Net income will be calculated as for all other Health Care eligible
       individuals in the post-eligibility process.

   2. Begin Date of Eligibility

       Eligibility for facility care or Waiver services shall not begin prior to the month in which
       the trust is established. A trust is considered established when the completed document
       is signed by the applicant and the trustee.

       It must be verified prior to beginning eligibility that the individual’s income that exceeds
       the program income limit has been placed in the trust.

   3. Trust Balance Exceeds Divisor

       There is no penalty for transfer of income into an income trust fund. However, if the
       balance of the trust at the end of any month (excluding any deposits that represent
       income for the following month and any spousal, dependent, or non-covered medical
       expenses amounts specified on the Notice of Action and in the electronic record that
       were not disbursed for the month) exceeds the amount of the current divisor used for
       transfer of resources (Appendix R), the individual will not be eligible again for facility
       care payment until the first of the month after the month in which the balance in the
       trust has been spent down for the benefit of the facility resident.

       NOTE: This only applies to facility payments.

H-114 Changes to an Income Trust
Refer to Health Care Procedures Manual for more information.
MS Manual 08/29/2022

   1. Medicare and Other Third Party Payments

       If in any month or part of a month a patient is in a Medicare bed or has other third party
       coverage which lessens or eliminates the obligation of the trustee to pay the facility for
       the patient’s share of cost as computed in the electronic record, the funds that would
       have been paid to the facility in that month shall remain in the trust and may not be
       disbursed for reasons other than for the recipient’s medical care for which there is no
       other third party liability.
MEDICAL SERVICES POLICY MANUAL, SECTION H
                                                  H-100 Long-Term Services and Supports


    2. Individual Leaves Facility
        If an individual leaves a facility for a therapeutic home visit up to fourteen (14) days or
        for a hospital visit up to five (5) days, Health Care benefits and vendor payment will
        continue, and the trustee will make disbursements in that month as specified on the
        Notice of Action and in the electronic record.

        If an individual improves to the extent that they are able to return home and are
        deemed unlikely to need continuing care in a facility according to written medical
        statement, the Health Care case must be closed. However, the trust must be maintained
        according to the terms of the trust, i.e., the individual’s income must continue to go into
        the trust; no other individual’s income may be put into the trust, etc. Disbursements
        may be made only for medical care, food, clothing, transportation, and shelter for the
        individual.

    3. Changes in Community Spouse or Dependent Status
        If a community spouse or dependent who has been receiving a monthly income
        allowance from the facility resident enters a facility, has an income change, divorces the
        recipient, or dies, the eligibility worker in charge of the case must be notified within ten
        (10) days by the recipient, representative, trustee, or other responsible party. No
        additional disbursements for the spouse or dependent can be made until the eligibility
        worker has revised the post-eligibility budget and provided the trustee with a copy of
        the Notice of Action.

H-115 Renewals with an Income Trust
MS Manual 08/29/2022

In addition to the required verification of other eligibility factors at annual renewal, the
eligibility worker will verify that the amount required to make the client income-eligible has
been placed in the trust and disbursements made as required since the last renewal. This may
be done by viewing bank statements or other trustee records that may be available.

H-116 Termination of an Income Trust
Refer to Health Care Procedures Manual for more information.
MS Manual 08/29/2022

Since income trusts are irrevocable, they cannot be terminated while the individual is still alive,
except when:

    •   Office of Chief Council (OCC) determines an error was made in the establishment of the
        trust;
MEDICAL SERVICES POLICY MANUAL, SECTION H
                                               H-100 Long-Term Services and Supports


  •   The individual has repaid Health Care all payments made since the establishment of the
      income trust;
  •   Individual is moving out of state and will be establishing an income trust in the other
      state; or
  •   Other extraordinary circumstance.
MEDICAL SERVICES POLICY MANUAL, SECTION H
                                                    H-400 Post-Eligibility


H-400 Post-Eligibility
MS Manual 08/29/2022

The eligibility groups Nursing Facility, Assisted Living Facility, PACE recipients in a nursing facility,
and PACE recipients in the community who have met income eligibility by establishing a Miller
Income Trust all require certain procedures to complete the determination of eligibility. These
eligibility procedures are explained in the following sections.

H-402 Consideration of Income
MS Manual 08/29/2022

After the IS has been determined to be resource eligible for Long-Term Services and Supports
(LTSS), income of the IS and CS will be considered as follows:

    1. Income Not From A Trust

        •    Income received solely in the name of either spouse will be considered income only
             to that spouse. Refer to MS E-432 #5 for “Veteran’s Benefits” exceptions.

        •    If payment of income is made in the names of both the IS and CS, half will be
             considered available to the CS and half to the IS.

        •    If payment of income is made in the names of the IS or the CS or both and another
             person, the income will be considered available to each spouse in proportion to
             each spouse’s interest. If payment is made with respect to both spouses, and no
             such interest is specified, one half (1/2) of the joint interest will be considered
             available to each spouse.
MEDICAL SERVICES POLICY MANUAL, SECTION H
                                                   H-400 Post-Eligibility


    2. Income From A Trust
        Income from a trust will be considered available to each spouse as provided by the trust.
        In the absence of a specific provision in the trust, the income will be considered
        available to each spouse as according to the rules in 1. a-c above or as directed by the
        Office of Chief Counsel (OCC) opinion. If the IS or CS established the trust, refer to MS H-
        304 for consideration of income from the trust.
    3. Income Through Property With No Instrument Establishing Ownership
        When income is from property that has no instrument establishing ownership (for
        example, income-producing heir’s property), half of the income will be considered to be
        available to the IS and half to the CS.

H-403 Rebutting Consideration of Income
MS Manual 08/29/2022

The eligibility worker will advise the applicant or representative of the income that will be
considered in the gross income test of the institutionalized spouse (IS).

If the IS or representative disagrees with the treatment of ownership interest in income (other
than from a trust) required by MS H-402, the IS or the representative will be given the
opportunity to rebut the presumption of ownership. To successfully rebut the presumption of
full or partial ownership, the IS or the representative must provide the following within thirty
(30) days of the date on the Notice of Action:

    1. A written, signed statement by the IS alleging ownership, the reason for the applicant’s
       receipt of the income, or for their name appearing as an owner on the payment of the
       income;
    2. Corroborating signed statements from the other owner(s);
    3. A change in the instrument of ownership removing the IS’s name from the instrument or
       a change that redirects the income to the actual owner(s); and
    4. Copies of the original and revised documents reflecting the change.

A successful rebuttal will result in a finding that supports the individual’s allegation regarding
ownership of the income.

If the individual elects not to rebut the consideration of ownership interest, the eligibility worker
will obtain a written statement from the individual that documents their election.

If the individual elects not to rebut, does not provide a rebuttal within the allotted time, or does
not provide all of the required evidence, the income produced from the presumed ownership
interest will be used in the individual’s eligibility determination.
MEDICAL SERVICES POLICY MANUAL, SECTION H
                                                  H-400 Post-Eligibility


If the individual submits all required evidence within the allotted time, the individual’s
ownership interest will be determined and the findings will be documented in the case record.
The income from the actual ownership interest (that is, the interest determined by the rebuttal)
will be used in the eligibility determination.

When the individual has successfully rebutted ownership of all or a portion of the income,
income payments will be considered available to the IS in proportion to their interest (if any).

NOTE: This section does not apply to federal, state, or other entitlements, pensions, or
retirement benefits.

H-410 Factors Used to Determine Cost of Care
MS Manual 08/29/2022

Nursing facility recipients are required to contribute all of their monthly income, minus certain
approved deductions, to the cost of their facility care. Health Care pays the balance of the
monthly charges due based on a per diem rate according to the individual's Level of Care.

NOTE: ARChoices and DDS Waiver recipients do not contribute to the cost of their care. For the
contribution to the cost of care guidelines for Assisted Living and PACE recipients, refer to MS H-
412 and MS H-413.

After determination of resource eligibility and the post-eligibility consideration of income (or
upon request by the applicant or recipient, their spouse, or their representative), the Nursing
Home Net Income, Community Spouse Minimum Monthly Maintenance Needs Allowance
(CSMNA), Community Spouse Monthly Income Allowance (CSMIA), and any Family Member
Allowances (FMA) will be computed in the eligibility system and a Notice of Action will be sent
for the appropriate time period.

Steps for determining the amount of income to be applied to the cost of care are shown below:

    1. Total Earned and Unearned Income

        Total all income of the recipient by type and amount with the following exceptions:

            •   For State Human Development Centers and Arkansas Health Center residents,
                interest income is not counted in the monthly budget.

            •   VA Aid and Attendance payments and VA CME/UME will not be counted as
                income.

            •   Mandatory deductions and work-related expenses will be deducted from gross
                earnings.
MEDICAL SERVICES POLICY MANUAL, SECTION H
                                               H-400 Post-Eligibility


         •   Court-ordered child support and court-ordered spousal support will be
             deducted from earned or unearned income.

         •   An additional amount of up to the current SSI/SPA will be deducted from the
             earnings of residents in ten-bed Intermediate Care Facilities for Individuals with
             Intellectual Disabilities (ICF/IID) and State Human Development Centers. Refer
             to MS H-430.

         •   LTC insurance payments, whether paid to the facility or directly to the recipient,
             are not considered in the eligibility process but are counted toward cost of care.

  2. Income Trust Fees (if applicable)

     Deduct the applicable income trust fees. Refer to MS H-111 #3.

         •   The monthly service charge for maintaining the trust bank account and

         •   Commercially reasonable administrative fees charged by the commercial
             institution serving as trustee

  3. Personal Needs Allowance

     Deduct the personal needs allowance (PNA).

         •   Subtract a forty-dollar ($40) PNA for most facility residents.
             NOTE: Facility residents whose only income is SSI will be allowed to keep thirty
             dollars ($30) as their PNA. The PNA of an SSI recipient who also has other
             income is forty dollars ($40). Refer to MS H-420.

         •   Single veterans and spouses of veterans with no dependents whose VA pensions
             have been reduced to $90 will be given the full ninety dollars ($90) as a personal
             needs allowance. An additional forty dollars ($40) will not be given. A ninety
             dollar ($90) PNA will not be given to any individual whose VA pension has not
             been reduced to ninety dollars ($90) by the Veterans Administration (VA). If VA
             later reduces the pension to ninety dollars ($90), an income adjustment will be
             made. Individuals should contact the Veterans Administration if they believe
             they are entitled to a ninety-dollar ($90) reduced pension.

         •   For residents of ICF/IIDs and State Human Development Centers with earned
             income, forty dollars ($40) may be given as a PNA in addition to a disregard of
             earned income up to the current SSI SPA.

         •   For nursing facility residents with earned income, forty dollars ($40) may be
             given as a PNA in addition to a disregard of up to one-hundred dollars ($100) of
MEDICAL SERVICES POLICY MANUAL, SECTION H
                                                H-400 Post-Eligibility


             their monthly earnings, provided there is documentation that a physician has
             prescribed employment activity as a therapeutic or rehabilitative measure.
             Refer to MS H-430.

  4. Community Spouse Monthly Income Allowance (CSMIA)

         •   A community spouse (CS) may be entitled to a portion of the Institutionalized
             Spouse’s (IS) income. The total amount of the IS’s income to which the CS is
             entitled is the CSMIA. It is calculated by adding the Minimum Monthly
             Maintenance Needs Allowance (CSMNA) and the Excess Shelter Allowance and
             subtracting the community spouse’s own income. The CSMNA is capped at a
             Maximum Monthly Maintenance Needs Allowance amount. The excess shelter
             allowance, CSMNA, and Maximum Monthly Maintenance Needs Allowance
             change annually. They are set by the federal government and are based on the
             Consumer Price Index.

         •   Shelter costs may include rent or mortgage (including principal and interest),
             prorated taxes and insurance (including personal property taxes and insurance
             on household contents if paid yearly), condominium or cooperative fee
             (including maintenance charges), and the standard utility allowance.

         •   Shelter costs must be verified. Utilities need not be verified.

             NOTE: The standard utility allowance is not allowed if utilities are included in
             rent or if someone else is paying the utilities. If only partial utilities are included
             in rent (for example, water), the full utility allowance may be used.

         •   The CSMIA will only be deducted to the extent contributed by the IS. If the IS
             contributes an amount less than the computed CSMIA, only the actual amount
             contributed will be deducted from the IS’s gross income, meaning, the actual
             contributions will be deducted instead of the computed CSMIA. Refer to MS H-
             416.

         •   An IS may not contribute more than the CSMIA unless under a court order, or
             unless a hearing officer has determined the CS needs income greater than the
             CSMNA. Refer to MS H-208.

         •   If a court orders the IS to contribute a larger amount for the support of the CS,
             then the amount of support ordered by the court will be used instead of the
             CSMIA. Any amount ordered by a court will not be subject to the limit on the
             CSMNA.

  5. Family Member Allowance (FMA) When There is a Spouse in the Home
MEDICAL SERVICES POLICY MANUAL, SECTION H
                                               H-400 Post-Eligibility


         •   A dependent family member may be entitled to an allowance. See MS Glossary
             for definition of dependent family member.

         •   The FMA is computed for each dependent family member by deducting the
             family member’s income from the CSMNA and by dividing the result by three
             (3).

         •   The FMA will only be deducted from the IS’s income to the extent that it is
             actually contributed by the IS. If the IS contributes an amount less than the
             FMA, only the actual amount contributed will be deducted from the IS’s gross
             income (that is, the actual contribution) will be deducted instead of the
             computed FMA. Refer to MS H-415.

             NOTE: A CS who is an SSI recipient, or who has children receiving SSI, will have
             the right to choose whether to accept a CSMIA or FMA. The result of accepting
             an allowance may be reduction or termination of SSI benefits and Health Care. A
             dependent family member receiving SSI (parent or sibling of the IS) will also be
             given the same choice.

  6. Protected Maintenance Allowance for Dependent Children When There is No Spouse in
     the Home

         •   In certain cases, an allowance may be given from the eligible individual's income
             for the protected maintenance of dependent children living in the home when
             there is no spouse in the home.

         •   Eligibility for the individual in a facility must be established before consideration
             is given for protected maintenance. If there are dependent children under
             eighteen (18) years of age the combined income of the children must be less
             than the Medically Needy Income Level (MNIL) for the appropriate number of
             children in the household to qualify for protected maintenance. Refer to MS O-
             710 for MNILs.

         •   In addition to meeting the stated income limitations, the countable resources of
             the dependent children must be within the AABD resource limitations to qualify
             for protected maintenance.
MEDICAL SERVICES POLICY MANUAL, SECTION H
                                              H-400 Post-Eligibility


  7. Non-covered Medical Expenses

     Non-covered medical expenses of all facility recipients that are not subject to payment
     by a third party will be deducted. Per 42 CFR § 435.725, this includes incurred expenses
     for medical or remedial care that are not subject to payment by a third party,
     including-

         •   Medicare and other health insurance premiums, deductibles, or coinsurance
             charges and

         •   Necessary medical or remedial care recognized under state law but not covered
             under the state’s Health Care plan, subject to reasonable limits the agency may
             establish on amounts of these expenses

     Reasonable limits on amounts for necessary medical or remedial care not covered under
     Health Care:

         •   The non-covered expenses must be incurred no earlier than the three-month
             period preceding the month of application.

         •   The non-covered expenses must be prescribed by a Medical professional (for
             example, a physician, dentist, optometrist, chiropractor, etc.).

         •   Payments for cosmetic or elective procedures (for example, face lifts or
             liposuction) will not be allowed except when prescribed by a medical
             professional.

         •   The expense amount is the least of the fee recognized by Health Care,
             Medicare, or the average cost allowed by a commercial health insurance plan in
             Arkansas.

         •   Expenses incurred as a result of the imposition of a transfer of assets penalty
             are not allowed.

         •   Expenses resulting from the failure to obtain prior approval from applicable
             private insurance, Medicare, or Health Care, due to the service being medically
             unnecessary, are not allowed.

         •   Deduction is not allowed for procedures allowed by Health Care when prior
             authorization is denied due to the service being medically unnecessary.

         •   Expenses when a third party (including Health Care) is liable for the expenses,
             even if provided by an out-of-network provider, are not allowed.
MEDICAL SERVICES POLICY MANUAL, SECTION H
                                             H-400 Post-Eligibility


        •   General health insurance premiums paid by someone other than the recipient
            (excluding the community spouse) who is not a financially responsible relative
            and repayment is not expected to be paid back to the third party by the
            recipient, are not allowed.

    The medical expenses must be verified as currently due and unpaid. Future anticipated
    expenses may be used when it is verified that these expenses have occurred with
    regularity in the past and will continue to occur with regularity in the future. Only the
    non-covered medical expenses for the facility recipient may be deducted.

    When there is a contract between an applicant and a medical provider and regular
    payments on a medical bill are being made, the monthly payment will be deducted as a
    noncoverable medical expense. When there is no contract, the monthly amount of the
    medical expense being paid may be deducted, with verification that regular payments
    are being made.

    Deduction of medical expenses is not allowed for nursing facility and ICF/IID residents
    for items and services included in the state’s Reimbursement Cost Manual as allowable
    cost items (items the facility will provide). Examples of these include wheelchairs, canes,
    crutches, walkers, ambulance services or enrollment fees for ambulance services (unless
    there is not a Health Care enrolled ambulance provider in the area), other
    transportation services, over-the-counter pain killers, antacids, laxatives, cough syrups,
    suppositories, anti- diarrhea medication, diapers, band-aids, bandages, peroxide,
    antiseptics. Facilities are required to provide these items and services at no additional
    charge to the recipient.

    An income offset for the purchase of eyeglasses, contact lenses, hearing
    aids, prostheses, and dentures can be made only if the following
    procedure is followed:

        •   The items must be prescribed by a physician or other licensed
            medical practitioner.

        •   The items must be a part of the recipient’s plan of care. It must
            be determined by the facility interdisciplinary team that the
            recipient’s quality of life will be enhanced and that they are able
            to utilize the item(s).

        •   The request must be approved by the facility’s Quality
            Assessment and Assurance Committee.

        •   The cost of the item(s) must be determined.
MEDICAL SERVICES POLICY MANUAL, SECTION H
                                              H-400 Post-Eligibility


        •   The recipient or authorized representative must provide the
            eligibility worker with verification of the above. The recipient or
            authorized representative must not make the purchase or pay the
            medical bill until the eligibility worker has made an adjustment to
            the patient liability.

    Other allowable medical expenses (if not subject to payment by a third party) include
    without limitation: health insurance premiums, deductibles, and coinsurance;
    prescription drugs not in the Health Care formulary; and physician, hospital, and dental
    charges; etc. These are not subject to approval through the facility’s Quality Assessment
    and Assurance Committee. However, prior to making the purchase or paying the bill, the
    recipient or authorized representative must provide the eligibility worker with proof
    that the item or items were prescribed by a physician or other licensed medical
    practitioner, including proof of the cost. A copy of the health insurance bill can be used
    for proof of health insurance premiums, deductibles, and coinsurance.

    Medicare premiums deducted from SSA payments prior to buy-in are not allowed as
    they will be reimbursed. The only allowable medical deductions will be the recipient’s
    noncovered medical expenses. Medical expenses of family members cannot be
    deducted from facility income.

    NOTE: There is no monthly limit on the number of prescription drugs for facility
    recipients receiving vendor payment, as long as the prescribed medicine is within the
    Health Care formulary. Health Care facility recipients who are not certified for vendor
    payment are limited to three (3) prescriptions per month. Nursing facility hospice
    recipients are eligible for three (3) prescriptions drugs per month, with the option of
    receiving up to six (6) prescriptions with prior authorization.

    Medical expenses can be of three types:

        •   Monthly - Expenses regularly incurred each month such as the Medicare Part D
            enhanced plan portion of premiums above the benchmark;
        •   Nonmonthly - Expenses which are not incurred monthly but are incurred
            periodically, such as quarterly insurance premiums; or
        •   One-time - Expenses incurred such as hearing aids.

    If the eligibility worker is unable to determine within a fair degree of certainty what the
    non- covered medical expenses will be, then no medical expenses will be deducted from
    the income.
MEDICAL SERVICES POLICY MANUAL, SECTION H
                                                  H-400 Post-Eligibility


    8. Net Income

        After deduction of any applicable excluded earnings, income trust fees, personal needs
        allowance, maintenance allowances, court-ordered child support, court-ordered spousal
        support, and non-covered medical expenses, the net amount remaining will be the
        amount the individual is expected to apply to the cost of care.

        If all of the IS’s gross income is depleted at any step in the computation, the amount
        applied to the vendor payment (cost of care) will be zero dollars ($0).

        After the post-eligibility budget is completed, a copy of the information will be provided
        to each spouse. If the budget is completed prior to application, at the request of either
        spouse, the information will only be provided to the spouse making the request.

H-412 Contribution to the Cost of Care for Assisted Living Facilities
MS Manual 08/29/2022

Assisted Living Facility (ALF) Waiver recipients are allowed to keep a flat ninety and eight
hundredths of a percent (90.8%) rounded up of the SSI/SPA for room and board. This will allow
the individual to purchase food from the facility, or elsewhere, if they prefer. In addition to the
charge for room and board, a monthly personal allowance will be deducted. The personal
allowance will be based on (nine percent) 9% of the SSI/SPA and rounded up. Both will increase
each January with the SSA/SSI Cost of Living Increases. See Appendix S for current amounts.

The following expenses are to be deducted from the cost of care for the ALF recipient in the
following order:

   1. Room and board payment
       NOTE: If the individual is receiving assistance through HUD, the deduction can only be for
       the amount the individual is actually paying.

   2. Personal needs allowance (PNA)

   3. Court-ordered child support and court-ordered spousal support

   4. Monthly medical insurance premiums

   5. Non-covered medical expenses including over-the-counter medications and medical
      supplies

   6. Spousal support payments for the community spouse and Family Member Allowance (MS
      H-410 #4-6)

   7. Applicable income trust fees (MS H-111 #3)
MEDICAL SERVICES POLICY MANUAL, SECTION H
                                                   H-400 Post-Eligibility


   8. Earnings up to the monthly SSI/SPA amount if employment is prescribed as therapeutic
      by the attending physician

       The ALF recipient’s income, minus room and board, personal allowance, and certain
       other expenses, will be contributed to their cost of care each month.

H-413 Contribution to the Cost of Care for PACE
MS Manual 08/29/2022

Post-eligibility treatment of income provisions will apply to PACE participants upon entry into a
nursing facility using the procedures for Long-Term Services and Supports (LTSS) nursing facility
Health Care. Refer to MS H-410.

For PACE participants in the community, there is no cost of care unless the individual has income
over the income limit and has established an income trust. For income trust guidelines, refer to
MS H-110.

The eligibility worker will calculate a patient liability amount for those PACE participants in
nursing homes and those who are eligible through establishing an Income Trust. The patient
liability amount will be calculated in the electronic record. The PACE provider will collect and
retain the patient liability. For individuals in nursing facilities, a personal needs allowance (PNA)
equal to the current nursing facility PNA, any applicable community spouse allowances, family
allowances, court-ordered child support, court-ordered spousal support, and excess medical
expenses will be deducted from the PACE participant’s monthly income. Refer to MS H-410.

For individuals in the community who are eligible through establishing an income trust, income
in excess of the current LTSS Health Care limit will also be paid to the PACE provider. A personal
needs allowance equal to the current LTSS/PACE limit of three (3) times the current SSI standard
payment amount (SPA), plus any applicable spousal or family support or excess medical
expenses will be deducted before making payment to the PACE provider.




H-416 Verification or Refusal of Contributions
MS Manual 08/29/2022

Prior to certification of the Institutionalized Spouse (IS), the IS or representative must indicate
that the IS plans to contribute the Community Spouse Monthly Income Allowance (CSMIA) and
MEDICAL SERVICES POLICY MANUAL, SECTION H
                                                H-400 Post-Eligibility


the Family Member Allowance (FMA) specified on the Notice of Action during the period of
institutionalization.

Otherwise, no allowances for the CS or other family members will be used in determining
Nursing Home Net Income. The CSMIA and FMA will only be deducted to the extent actually
contributed by the IS.

If the CS does not want to accept the contribution from the IS, the CS may decline the income.




H-430 Earnings of Intermediate Care Facilities for Individuals with
Intellectual Disabilities (ICF/IID) Facility Residents
MS Manual 08/29/2022

Residents of ICF/IID facilities, including residents of State Human Development Centers, who
have earned income may be given an earnings disregard of up to an amount equal to the
current SSI standard payment amount (SPA) in addition to the forty dollars ($40)personal needs
allowance.

Nursing facility residents with earnings may be given a disregard of up to one-hundred ($100) of
their monthly earnings, provided there is documentation that a physician has prescribed
employment activity as a therapeutic or rehabilitative measure. If a nursing home resident
receiving skilled care reports earnings, the Division of Provider Services and Quality Assurance
(DPSQA) Office of Long-Term Care (OLTC) should be contacted and requested to reevaluate
medical necessity.
MEDICAL SERVICES POLICY MANUAL, SECTION H
                                                   H-400 Post-Eligibility


All nursing facility and ICF/IID residents must first pass the gross income test, with
no disregards allowed. If found eligible, the consideration of earnings will be as
follows.

   1. Ten-Bed ICF/IID Facilities and State Human Development Centers

       Earnings of residents of these facilities must be taken into consideration for both
       eligibility and net income determinations. If residents pass the gross income eligibility
       test, their earnings will be included in the net income determination. In determining the
       net income to be applied toward the vendor payment, first subtract the mandatory
       deductions (for example, federal and state income taxes) from gross income and, from
       the remaining earned income, up to an amount equal to the current SSI SPA for personal
       needs. Refer to MS H-410 for consideration of earnings at certification.

   2. Fluctuating Earnings

       If the earnings of ICF/IID facility residents stay below the SSI SPA, no reporting of
       fluctuations is needed.

       The facility administrator will report to the eligibility worker any month in which a
       resident’s earnings exceed the SSI SPA.

       If earnings consistently stay above the SSI SPA, they may be averaged (MS E-415),
       provided the facility administrator will agree to report to the eligibility worker:

            •   every six (6) months when earnings are fairly stable; or

            •   more frequently if the resident loses employment, changes jobs, or has earnings
                in any month which are more than fifteen dollars ($15) above the computed
                average.
MEDICAL SERVICES POLICY MANUAL, SECTION H
                                                   H-400 Post-Eligibility


H-440 Effective Eligibility Dates for Nursing Homes and Intermediate
Care Facilities for Individuals with Intellectual Disabilities (ICF/IID)
Services
MS Manual 08/29/2022

The effective date of eligibility of an applicant for nursing home and ICF/IID depends on three (3)
factors:

    1. Date of Entry

        The individual’s date of entry into a participating facility is indicated on the DCO-0702,
        Notice of Admission, Discharge or Transfer From a Facility, which is completed by the
        facility and forwarded to both the DPSQA Office of Long-Term Care and the County
        Office for initial certification. Vendor payments cannot begin prior to the individual’s
        date of entry into a facility.

    2. Date of Medical Necessity

        Medical necessity is determined by the DPSQA Office of Long-Term Care. The medical
        necessity decision is transmitted to the County Office and the facility by the DHS-0704,
        Evaluation of Medical Need Criteria, which classifies the patient for a specific level of
        care. If a DHS-0704 is received by the County Office on an applicant that classifies them
        for a specific level of care, medical necessity exists to the date of the individual’s entry
        or to the date of application if the patient was accepted as private pay only until the
        application for Health Care was made. However, if the patient is in an ICF/IID facility or
        was subject to Pre-Admission Screening and Annual Resident Review (PASARR), medical
        necessity begins on the DHS-0704 decision date for ICF/IID or PASARR date for PASARR
        residents, and Health Care and vendor payment cannot begin prior to this date.

    3. Date of Categorical Eligibility

         Categorical eligibility for facility care and services under the AABD criteria can be
        established to begin three (3) months prior to the date of application provided all
        eligibility conditions are met. If categorical eligibility is established by receipt of SSI or
        Foster Care, the date to begin vendor payment is not governed by the three-month
        retroactive eligibility limitation as applied under the AABD eligibility criteria. Even
        though categorical eligibility may be established prior to application, the begin date for
        Health Care and vendor payment cannot be prior to the decision date on the DHS-0704
        for ICF/IID applicants or PASARR date for individuals subject to PASARR.

    4. Authorization of services cannot be made until all three (3) factors have been met.
MEDICAL SERVICES POLICY MANUAL, SECTION H
                                                    H-400 Post-Eligibility


H-450 Approval of an Applicant Who is in a Medicare Bed
MS Manual 08/29/2022

When Medicare approves individuals for skilled nursing care/extended care, the facility receives
reimbursement in the form of Medicare per diem and Health Care coinsurance (if applicable) for
up to 100 days, provided the individual continues to meet Medicare criteria.

Applications for Medicare approved admissions will be processed in the same manner and
timeframe as applications for non-Medicare approved admissions, except that nursing home
services will not be authorized until Medicare benefits have been exhausted. Medicare pays
100% of facility expenses for only 20 days. After this time, the individual becomes liable for
coinsurance, which cannot be paid by Health Care until the case is opened.

The monthly Medicare per diem amount will not be considered when determining income
eligibility, but it will be treated as a third-party resource to be applied to the cost of care in a
facility.

If at some point, the individual fails to meet Medicare criteria or exhausts his/her benefits,
Medicare will stop payment. The facility will notify the eligibility worker of the change in status.
On the day following termination of Medicare benefits, the eligibility worker may authorize
facility services to be effective on that date, provided the individual continues to meet all Long-
Term Services and Supports (LTSS) requirements.

H-481 Case Adjustments for Lump Sum Payments in Prior Months
MS Manual 08/29/2022

When a eligibility worker learns that a recipient, who does not have an Income Trust, received a
lump sum benefit in a prior month which caused ineligibility for the month of receipt only, it will
not be necessary to close the case if the recipient regained eligibility the month following the
MEDICAL SERVICES POLICY MANUAL, SECTION H
                                                   H-400 Post-Eligibility


receipt of the lump sum. If the recipient has lost eligibility for more than one month, then the
case will be closed, and a new application will be required.

Overpayment reports for Long-Term Services and Supports (LTSS) and other Health Care
categories will be submitted to recover any Health Care payments made during the month of
ineligibility.

Refer to MS Section M. If the facility has retained the lump sum benefits, no overpayment is
required to recoup the vendor payments.

H-490 Absences from Long-Term Care Facilities
MS Manual 08/29/2022

All facilities are required to report to the County Office certain recipient absences from the
facility. Absences will be reported for death, discharge, and transfer. Overnight home visits and
hospitalizations will not be reported. Admissions to the Arkansas State Hospital (Little Rock) will
be reported as discharges.

Death or Discharge

Upon notification from the facility reporting the death or discharge of a recipient, the County
Office will initiate action to close the recipient’s case. Advance notice is not required for closure
due to death.
MEDICAL SERVICES POLICY MANUAL, SECTION H
                                                  H-400 Post-Eligibility


Home Visits

A recipient receiving Long-Term care services has the right to make overnight home visits
whenever they desire, provided the visits are consistent with the recipient’s required level of
care and their attending physician’s orders. This includes authorized home visits during the
thirty (30) days in which institutional status is achieved.

The DPSQA Office of Long-Term Care is responsible for monitoring recipient home visits and
their consistency with the patient’s required level of care. For example, a skilled care patient
who makes overnight home visits might require reclassification action by Long-Term Care.

Facility services may continue during a recipient’s absence due to therapeutic home visit
without regard to the cumulative number of days absent during a calendar year. However, a
fourteen (14) consecutive day limit is placed on each home visit for payment purposes.

Home visits of less than fourteen (14) days will not be reported by facilities to the County Office.
The date left counts as the first day of absence. When there is an indication that the recipient is
expected to return to the facility within fourteen (14) days, the County Office will take no action.

For home visits that exceed fourteen (14) consecutive days facilities will report the date left and
a discharge on the fifteenth consecutive day of absence. When there is no indication that the
recipient is expected to return to the facility within fourteen (14) days, the County Office will
initiate action to close the case.

        •   Cases suspended or closed can be reinstated without new application if the
            recipient returns to the facility within nintety (90) days of the date left on home
            visit.

        •   If the reevaluation falls due during the period of suspension, it will not be
            completed until the client reenters the facility.

        •   If the individual does not reenter the facility within ninety (90) days, a new
            application will be required to reopen the case.
MEDICAL SERVICES POLICY MANUAL, SECTION H
                                                   H-400 Post-Eligibility


H-493 Operations Plan - Relocation of Recipients
MS Manual 08/29/2022

The Division of Provider Services and Quality Assurance (DPSQA) Office of Long-Term Care
(OLTC) will initiate all relocation actions of Agency recipients in facilities that are closed for any
reason other than a disaster. Such reasons include decertification by the federal government or
the DPSQA, loss of licenses, voluntary withdrawal from the Health Care Program, or cancellation
of agreement by the DPSQA. Since federal regulations require all program recipients to be
relocated within thirty (30) days of the termination date, it is essential that specific procedures
be established to ensure that recipients are relocated with maximum safety and well-being.

Authority to initiate, direct and monitor all relocation actions is delegated to the Assistant
Director of the Office of Long-Term Care, by the Director of the DPSQA.
MEDICAL SERVICES POLICY MANUAL, SECTION H
                                                 H-600 Estate Recovery



H-600 Estate Recovery
MS Manual 08/29/2022

The Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1993 and Arkansas Act 415 of 1993 mandate recovery
of medical payments correctly made from August 13, 1993 and later from the estates of:

    •   Individuals of any age who were considered to be permanently institutionalized, who
        received medical services in a nursing or ICF/IID facility, and who were required to pay
        all but a minimal amount of income for their care, and

    •   Individuals fifty-five (55) years of age and older who received medical services in a
        nursing or ICF/IID facility or in a home and community based waiver program, whether
        or not they were considered to be permanently institutionalized.

Estate recovery will not be made from the estate of deceased individuals when:

    •   There is a surviving spouse, dependent children under twenty-one (21) years of age, or
        children who are blind or have a disability (as determined by SSA disability guidelines),

    •   Recovery will create an undue hardship for other surviving family members, or

    •   Recovery is not cost effective.

Estate recovery will not be made from resources that were protected as a result of the
individual having a Qualified Long Term Care Insurance Partnership Policy. The maximum
amount protected at estate recovery will be the amount protected when eligibility was
established. If any of the protected resources have been spent or given away, only the amount
remaining will be protected at estate recovery.

Estate recovery will not be made from interests acquired through grant of a beneficiary deed,
per Arkansas Act 570 of 2021 when:

    •   The beneficiary deed was properly excuted and recorded; and

    •   Documentation has been provided to the entity seeking recovery.

H-630 Recovery Procedures
MS Manual 08/29/2022

State law requires in most cases that the appointed personal representative of the estate of a
deceased person shall promptly mail to the creditors of an estate, including the Department of
Human Services (DHS), a copy of the notice of their appointment that has been published in the
newspaper. The published notice is to include the requirement that all claims against the estate
MEDICAL SERVICES POLICY MANUAL, SECTION H
                                                   H-600 Estate Recovery



be submitted within six (6) months of the date of publication of the first notice. A copy of the
petition for probate of a will or administration of an estate and the decedent’s Social Security
number will be attached to the notice forwarded to DHS.

After receiving notice of the opening of an estate or filing of an “Affidavit for the Collection of a
Small Estate”, the TPL Unit will check the MMIS System to determine if the decedent received
Health Care benefits in a nursing facility, ICF/IID facility, or under a home and community based
waiver program.

Property interest established by a properly excuted and recorded beneficiary deed are not
subject to estate recovery.

TPL will not pursue recovery if:

    1. There is a surviving spouse;

    2. There are surviving minor children;

    3. There are surviving children of any age who are blind or permanently and totally
       disabled as defined in 42 U.S.C. §§ 1381 et seq;

    4. In cases of a home, there is a son or daughter currently lawfully residing in the home
       where they have been residing for at least two (2) years immediately before the
       recipient’s admission to the medical institution, and who establishes to the satisfaction
       of the State that they provided care to the recipient that permitted the recipient to
       reside in the home rather than in an institution;

    5. In cases of a home, there is a sibling currently lawfully residing in the home, and the
       sibling was residing in the home at least one (1) year immediately before the date of the
       recipient’s admission to the medical institution; or,

    6. The recovery is not cost effective.

For factors one (1) through five (5) of the above-listed (MS H-630), recovery is not waived.
Instead, it may be postponed until the individuals identified in those factors die or move from
the home.

If benefits were paid for services in a nursing facility, ICF/IID facility, or home and under a home
and community based waiver program, TPL will mail to the personal representative or the
distributee of a small estate a Notice of Estate Recovery (DHS-20), advising of the intent to
recover Health Care payments and of the procedures for requesting a hardship waiver.

A payment profile for the decedent will be ordered from the Division of Medical Services (DMS).
When the payment profile is received, a claim against the estate will be prepared for the
MEDICAL SERVICES POLICY MANUAL, SECTION H
                                                  H-600 Estate Recovery



signature of the Director of DMS. The claim will be filed with the appropriate Probate Clerk and
a copy mailed to the personal representative, attorney for the estate, or distributee of the
estate.

If no benefits were paid, no further action will be taken.

H-640 Application for a Hardship Waiver
MS Manual 08/29/22

The personal representative or distributee of an estate may apply for a hardship waiver at the
time notice of the estate is given to DHS, or within 30 days after receiving notice from DHS of
intent to recover Health Care payments and the procedures for requesting a hardship waiver
(DHS- 20). Refer to MS H-730 for procedures.
MEDICAL SERVICES POLICY MANUAL, SECTION H
                                                 H-700 Undue Hardship Waiver



H-700 Undue Hardship Waiver
MS Manual 08/29/2022

An individual may request an Undue Hardship Waiver:

    1. When denied eligibility due to excess home equity;

    2. When denied nursing facility vendor payment due to a transfer of resources/income for
       less than fair market value; or

    3. After receiving notice from the Department of Human Services (DHS) of intent to
       recover Health Care payments through the Estate Recovery process.

The individual or authorized representative will need to provide the eligibility worker
verification to support the allegation of hardship.

H-710 Hardship Waiver for Home Equity
MS Manual 08/29/2022

An individual who is denied eligibility due to excess home equity may request an Undue
Hardship Waiver. (Re. MS E-517) An example of a situation in which an undue hardship may
exist is if the individual makes an allegation that the home equity should not be counted
because of a legal impediment to selling or transferring the home.

The eligibility worker will submit all Home Equity Undue Hardship Waiver requests and
supporting documentation to the Division of County Operations LTSS Unit. A decision on the
hardship waiver will be made by the Division of County Operations (DCO) Hardship Waiver
Committee. The eligibility worker will send the committee decision and information about the
right to appeal the decision to the person who applied for the waiver. If the person who applied
for the waiver disagrees with the DHS decision, they may appeal the decision within thirty (30)
days of receipt of the notice about the DHS decision (MS J-100).

H-720 Hardship Waiver for Transfer of Resources/Income
MS Manual 08/29/2022

Once the eligibility worker has determined that this transfer does not meet an exception found
at MS H-309 and it has been determined that the resource or income was not transferred
exclusively for some other purpose through a rebuttal found at MS H-312-313, a hardship
waiver may be pursued. An individual who is denied Waiver services or nursing facility vendor
payment due to a transfer of resources or income for less than fair market value may request an
Undue Hardship Waiver.
MEDICAL SERVICES POLICY MANUAL, SECTION H
                                                  H-700 Undue Hardship Waiver



No penalty period for uncompensated transfer will be imposed upon an institutionalized or
Waiver individual to the extent that it is determined that denial of eligibility would work an
undue hardship. Undue hardship exists if each condition below is met:

    1. Counting uncompensated value would make an individual ineligible;

    2. Lack of assistance would deprive the individual of food, shelter, and care determined to
       be medically necessary;

    3. The individual’s total resources are not great enough to pay for facility care for one (1)
       month; and

    4. The resource(s) cannot be recovered from the individual(s) to whom the resource(s) was
       transferred without compensation due to loss, destruction, theft, or other extraordinary
       circumstance.

Undue hardship does not exist when applying the transfer provisions would merely cause the
individual inconvenience or would restrict their lifestyle without putting them at risk of serious
deprivation.

The individual or the individual’s authorized representative may apply for an undue hardship
waiver. In addition, a representative from the facility in which an individual is residing may apply
for an undue hardship waiver on behalf of the client with either the consent of the client or their
personal representative. To ensure consistency with decisions regarding what constitutes a
hardship, the eligibility worker will route all applications for an undue hardship waiver to the
Division of County Operations LTSS Unit.

A decision on the hardship waiver will be made by the DCO Hardship Waiver Committee. The
eligibility worker will send the committee’s decision and information about the right to appeal
the decision to the person who applied for the waiver. If the person who applied for the waiver
disagrees with the committee’s decision, they may appeal the decision within thirty (30) days of
receipt of the notice about the decision (MS J-100).

H-730 Hardship Waiver for Estate Recovery
MS Manual 08/29/2022

The personal representative or distributee of an estate may apply for a hardship waiver at the
time that notice of the estate is given to DHS or within thirty (30) days after receiving notice
from DHS of intent to recover Health Care payments and the procedures for requesting a
hardship waiver (DHS-20). To apply for a waiver, the representative or distributee must mail a
statement setting forth the facts that constitute the undue hardship to:
MEDICAL SERVICES POLICY MANUAL, SECTION H
                                                 H-700 Undue Hardship Waiver



                   Third Party Liability Unit
                   Attention: Decedents’ Estates
                   P. O. Box 1437, Slot S296
                   Little Rock, AR 72203-1437

The statement must set forth the facts that constitute the undue hardship. Tax returns, income
statements or other documents that support the position that estate recovery would work an
undue hardship on the survivors must be submitted. The Third Party Liability Unit will send the
hardship request and supporting documents to the DCO Hardship Waiver Committee. In
determining the existence of an undue hardship, the DCO Hardship Waiver Committee will
consider factors including, but not limited to the following:

    1. The estate asset that is subject to recovery is the sole-income producing asset of a
       beneficiary of the estate;

    2. Without receipt of the proceeds of the estate, a beneficiary would become eligible for
       federal or state benefits;

    3. Allowing a beneficiary to receive the inheritance from the estate would enable a
       beneficiary to discontinue eligibility for federal or state benefits;

    4. The estate asset subject to recovery is a home with a value of fifty percent (50%) or less
       of the average price of a home in the county where the homestead is located, as of the
       date of the decedent’s death; and

    5. Other compelling circumstances.

A determination that hardship does not exist will be made if the individual created the hardship
through estate planning in which assets were divested in order to avoid estate recovery.

A decision on the hardship waiver will be made by the DCO Hardship Waiver Committee.

The committee’s decision and information about the right to appeal the decision will be sent by
certified mail, return receipt requested, to the person who applied for the waiver. If the person
who applied for the waiver disagrees with the committee’s decision, they may appeal the
decision within thirty (30) days of receipt of the notice about the decision (MS J-100).

If recovery is not made due to the determination of hardship, DHS may decide to recover at a
later time if the conditions which caused the original hardship cease to exist.
                                    FINANCIAL IMPACT STATEMENT
                          PLEASE ANSWER ALL QUESTIONS COMPLETELY
DEPARTMENT            Department of Human Services
DIVISION              County Operations
PERSON COMPLETING THIS STATEMENT Jason Callan
TELEPHONE 501-320-6540                FAX                         EMAIL: Jason.Callan@dhs.arkansas.gov

To comply with Ark. Code Ann. § 25-15-204(e), please complete the following Financial Impact
Statement and file two copies with the questionnaire and proposed rules.

SHORT TITLE OF THIS
RULE                                     Medical Services Policy Section A-116, H-100, H-400, H-600 and
                                         H-700

1. Does this proposed, amended, or repealed rule have a financial impact?             Yes              No

2. Is the rule based on the best reasonably obtainable scientific, technical,
   economic, or other evidence and information available concerning the
   need for, consequences of, and alternatives to the rule?                           Yes              No

3. In consideration of the alternatives to this rule, was this rule determined
   by the agency to be the least costly rule considered?                              Yes              No

    If an agency is proposing a more costly rule, please state the following:

    (a)   How the additional benefits of the more costly rule justify its additional cost;



    (b)   The reason for adoption of the more costly rule;



    (c)   Whether the more costly rule is based on the interests of public health, safety, or welfare, and if
          so, please explain; and;


    (d)   Whether the reason is within the scope of the agency’s statutory authority; and if so, please
          explain.


4. If the purpose of this rule is to implement a federal rule or regulation, please state the following:

    (a)   What is the cost to implement the federal rule or regulation?

Current Fiscal Year                                          Next Fiscal Year

General Revenue       $                                     General Revenue          $
Federal Funds         $                                     Federal Funds            $
Cash Funds                                                  Cash Funds
                                                                                                Revised June 2019
     Special Revenue                                             Special Revenue
     Other (Identify)                                            Other (Identify)

     Total                 $                                      Total                  $

       (b)      What is the additional cost of the state rule?

        Current Fiscal Year                                          Next Fiscal Year

        General Revenue        $2,255,451                             General Revenue        $2,655,458
        Federal Funds          $5,691,875                             Federal Funds          $6,701,335
        Cash Funds                                                    Cash Funds
        Special Revenue                                               Special Revenue
        Other (Identify)                                              Other (Identify)

        Total                  $7,947,327                             Total                  $ 9,356,792


 5. What is the total estimated cost by fiscal year to any private individual, entity and business subject to the
    proposed, amended, or repealed rule? Identify the entity(ies) subject to the proposed rule and explain how
    they are affected.

     Current Fiscal Year                                             Next Fiscal Year
     $                                                               $



 6.     What is the total estimated cost by fiscal year to state, county, and municipal government to implement
        this rule? Is this the cost of the program or grant? Please explain how the government is affected.

     Current Fiscal Year                                             Next Fiscal Year
     $ 2,255,451                                                     $ 2,655,458




7.     With respect to the agency’s answers to Questions #5 and #6 above, is there a new or increased cost
       or obligation of at least one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000) per year to a private individual,
       private entity, private business, state government, county government, municipal government, or to
       two (2) or more of those entities combined?
                                                                  Yes           No
       If YES, the agency is required by Ark. Code Ann. § 25-15-204(e)(4) to file written findings at the
       time of filing the financial impact statement. The written findings shall be filed simultaneously
       with the financial impact statement and shall include, without limitation, the following:

       (1) a statement of the rule’s basis and purpose;
       This rule change allows Long Term Services and Supports (LTSS) applicants/recipients the
       added deductions of court ordered child support and spousal support in their patient liability
       budget. Also, there is an adjustment to Miller Income Trust requirements. Individuals no
       longer have to place all income into a Miller Income Trust, only the amount that causes the
       individual to be ineligible must be transferred. In addition, this rule change prohibits estate
       recovery from assets that are transferred by beneficiary deed.

                                                                                                   Revised June 2019
(2) the problem the agency seeks to address with the proposed rule, including a statement of whether
    a rule is required by statute;
This rule is required due to an agreement between DHS and the legislature concerning the
patient liability update and the Miller Income Trust update. Legislation was proposed but
pulled due to the agreement. Act 570 addresses the change to the estate recovery process.

(3) a description of the factual evidence that:
        (a) justifies the agency’s need for the proposed rule; and
        (b) describes how the benefits of the rule meet the relevant statutory objectives and justify
             the rule’s costs;
This rule change is a result of legislation that was proposed for the Miller Income Trust and
Act 570 for the estate recovery change.

(4) a list of less costly alternatives to the proposed rule and the reasons why the alternatives do not
    adequately address the problem to be solved by the proposed rule;
There are no less costly alternatives.

(5) a list of alternatives to the proposed rule that were suggested as a result of public comment and
    the reasons why the alternatives do not adequately address the problem to be solved by the
    proposed rule;
N/A

(6) a statement of whether existing rules have created or contributed to the problem the agency seeks
    to address with the proposed rule and, if existing rules have created or contributed to the
    problem, an explanation of why amendment or repeal of the rule creating or contributing to the
    problem is not a sufficient response; and
The existing rule did not allow a deduction in the patient liability budget for court ordered
child support and spousal support and does not allow for partial income to be placed in a
Miller Income Trust. Changes to the estate recovery process for beneficiary deeds is mandated
by Act 570. These changes will have a positive impact on LTSS applicants and recipients.

(7) an agency plan for review of the rule no less than every ten (10) years to determine whether,
    based upon the evidence, there remains a need for the rule including, without limitation,
    whether:
        (a) the rule is achieving the statutory objectives;
        (b) the benefits of the rule continue to justify its costs; and
        (c) the rule can be amended or repealed to reduce costs while continuing to achieve the
            statutory objectives.
The Agency will develop a plan to review the impact of this rule within a designated time
frame to ensure that there is still a positive impact to the LTSS applicant/recipient.




                                                                                         Revised June 2019

