Source URL: https://arkleg.state.ar.us/Home/FTPDocument?path=%2FAssembly%2FMeeting+Attachments%2F040%2F5095%2FD.12.a+DHS+DCO+Med+Servs+Policy+Manual+and+Relevant+Acts.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-09-23

MEDICAL SERVICES POLICY MANUAL, SECTION X
                                          Error! No text of specified style in document.

                                                 A-116 Premiums For The Adult Expansion Group




A-116 Premiums For The Adult Expansion Group
MS Manual 018/0129/1722

A program participant who has income of at least 100% of the federal poverty level will pay a
premium of no more than 2% of their income to a health insurance carrier.
Individuals who are medically frail and receiving traditional Medicaid will not be required to pay
a premium.
Failure to pay the premium for three (3) consecutive months will result in a debt to the State of
Arkansas.
 Medical Services Policy Manual, Section H



 H-100 Long- Term Services and Supports
 MS Manual 0708/1329/152022

 The policies located in Section H of this manual describe programs and procedures that are
 unique to the Long- Term Services and Supports eligibility groups. These sections include:

     1. Income Trusts, (MS H-110-116);

     2. Spousal Impoverishment Rules, (MS H-200);

     3. Transfer of Resources, (MS H-300); and

     4. Post- Eligibility rules. (MS H-400);

     5. Long- Term Care Insurance Partnership Program (MS H-500);

     6. Estate Recovery (MS H-600); and

     7. Undue Hardship Waiver (MS H-700).


   H-110 Income Trusts
MS Manual 0108/0129/1422

An individual with income in excess of the income limit may establish an income trust for the purpose of becoming
MedicaidHealth Care eligible. This type of trust is commonly referred to as a Miller Income Trust.




   H-111 Requirements for an Income Trust
 MS Manual 0708/1329/152022

 An Miller Income Trust must meet the following conditions:

     1. Terms and Other Conditions

         The trust must be irrevocable. It can be terminated or amended only by mutual
         agreement between the Department of Human Services (DHS) and the trustee.

         The trust may be used to establish MedicaidHealth Care eligibility for individuals
         determined to be medically in need of care in a nursing facility or assisted living
         facility or PACE.
 Medical Services Policy Manual, Section H


         The trust must have been created either by the individual or by the individual’s
         child, spouse, sibling, attorney-in-fact or Power of Attorney, guardian, or
         representative payee as determined by the Social Security Administration.
         Establishment of a Miller Income Trust by these individuals previously listed will be
         considered as valid for the purposes of Health Care eligibility.

         The trust must have been established on or after August 11, 1993.

         The trust can only be funded from Social Security, pension, and all other income payable
         to an individual, including income earned by the trust account. If assets other than
         income, such as real or personal property, are placed in the trust, the individual cannot
         be eligible for facility services under the income trust provisions.

         The trust must contain a provision that all assets remaining in the trust at the
         individual’s death will be transferred to DHS up to an amount equal to medical
         payments made by DHS on behalf of the individual subsequent to establishment of the
         trust.

     2. Consideration of Income

         An individual with gross monthly countable income, (excluding VA A&A and CME/UME),
         which that exceeds the federal cap of three (3) times the SSI payment for an individual
         living in histheir own home, may establish eligibility through an income trust.

         Individuals are not required to place all their income into a Miller Income Trust to be
         eligible for Health Care. Any income, other than VA A&A and CME/UME, that exceeds the
         income limit must be placed in the trust.
         All of an individual’s income must be placed in the trust, except VA A&A and/or
         CME/UME.

         Income received by an individual and placed in the trust, or an individual’s income paid
         to the trust by direct deposit, is not countable income for eligibility purposes but will
         be countable toward patient liability. Patient liability is calculated from all gross
         income, regardless of whether or not it is placed in the trust.

Income which is received directly by an individual must be transferred to the trust immediately
upon receipt.
Medical Services Policy Manual, Section H



                                               H-100 Long Term Services and Supports




     The income (other than income accumulated by the trust) must be income payable to
     the individual, and the income must first be received by the individual before being
     placed in the trust. If the individual assigns the right to receive any or all of the income
     to the trust, the income assigned is no longer considered income to the individual under
     SSI rules. Such an assignment will be considered a disqualifying transfer. However, for
     purposes of this section, if an individual authorizes the income to be paid into the trust
     by direct deposit from the payor, the direct deposit will not be considered an
     assignment (disqualifying transfer).

    Income in excess of the income limit that is received directly by an individual must be transferred to the trust
    immediately upon receipt. Any income that is not transferred into a Miller Income Trust in the month it is
    received will be counted when determining eligibility.



     If in any month the individual’s income that exceeds the income limit is not placed
     in the trust, the individual is not eligible for MedicaidHealth Care benefits or vendor
     payment in that month.

     The income must be placed into and maintained in a single trust account.

     If an individual receives income on an irregular basis, (such as royalty or farm rental
     income, or lump sum payments such as SSA retroactive benefits), the income must
     be placed into the trust when it is received.

     If an individual receives income paid jointly to him themselves and another
     person(s), the facility resident’s share of the income must be separated from the
     other owner(s) share(s)shares owned by the other sperson(s), before depositing his
     the facility resident’stheir share in the trust account. No income belonging to any
     other individual may be placed in the income trust of a MedicaidHealth Care
     recipient.

  3. Fees and Other Disbursements

     When no relatives are available to serve as the trustee, a commercial institution such as
     a bank can be named as trustee. Commercially reasonable administrative fees that are
     charged by the commercial institution may be allowed as trustee fees. The fee will be
     considered commercially reasonable if the fee is consistent with administrative fees
     charged to other customers for similar services. Trustee fees will not be allowed except
Medical Services Policy Manual, Section H
     in these instances. The bank service charges for maintaining the bank account are
     allowable fees.


  4. Trustee Responsibilities

     A trustee may serve without bond or supervision of any court.

     Prior to a distribution from the trust, the trustee must notify the caseworkereligibility
     worker responsible for the case of any fees, income taxes, or other payments which
     that must be made from the trust before these disbursements can be made. The
     advance notice must be made no later than the month which that precedes the month
     in which the disbursements will be made.

     After certification of the case, no disbursements of any kind can be made by the trustee
     until the trustee has been provided a current Notice of Action with the post- eligibility
     budget completed Post Eligibility Income Worksheet, DCO- 712, completed by the case
     worker in charge of the case system. ( See MS H-410.)

     Any disbursements made that are not for the benefit of the recipient, the community
     spouse, or other dependents, as specified on the DCO-712on the Notice of Action and
     in the electronic record, will be considered a transferof resources, and a penalty period
     may be applied.

     Payments must be made from the trust each month only in the amounts specified on
     the DCO-712 on the Notice of Action and in the electronic record. The payments must
     be made directly to the designated recipient, i.e., to the recipient or responsible
     person for the personal needs allowance (PNA); to the community spouse and/or
     dependent(s), or both, for their allowances; to the recipient or responsible party for
     the recipient’s non-covered medical expenses; to the recipient of court-ordered child
     support or court-ordered spousal support, or both; and to the facility for the patient’s
     share of cost.

     While an individual is receiving MedicaidHealth Care benefits in a facility, no
     disbursements otherthan those specified on the DCO-712 on the Notice of Action and
     in the electronic record may be made.

     The trust records shall be open to inspection and for copying by DHS, and periodic
     reporting may be required at the discretion of DHS.

     If the trustee becomes aware of any change in circumstances which that will affect the
     recipient’s eligibility or the amounts being distributed monthly from the trust, the
     trustee shall be responsible for notifying the caseworkereligibility worker of such
     changes. Changes to bereported include without limitation income changes, increase or
     decrease of cost of non-covered medical expenses, recipient dies death or
     leavesdeparture from the facility, community spouse enterings a facility, etc.
Medical Services Policy Manual, Section H

       The trustee must notify the caseworkereligibility worker if in any month the funds are
       not disbursed according to the DCO-712 Notice of Action or if the balance in the trust
       account exceeds the maximum allowed as specified in MS H-113, Post- Eligibility
       Procedures, so that the worker can adjust the facility payment(s) for the month(s) in
       which the vendor payment is affected.


  H-112 Income Trust Application Process
  Refer to Health Care Procedures Manual for more information.
MS Manual 0708/1329/152022
       The process of applying for a consists of the following steps:

       Request for Eligibility Determination
       Individuals with income above the federal cap who inquire regarding MedicaidHealth
       Care eligibilityin a facility or for the Waiver program will be given information regarding
       eligibility limits under the income trust provisions along with a resource assessment (Re.
       MS E- 500) if requested. Individuals with excess resources cannot establish eligibility
       through an income trust.

     NOTE: If an individual receives income from a LTC insurance policy that puts
       him/herthem over the income limit, an income trust is not required unless the other
       countable income, (without counting the LTC insurance payments), puts
       him/herthem over the incomelimit.




   1. Application for Benefits
      At application for facility care or the Waiver program, the applicant, representative,
      guardian or other person responsible for the application, must inform the
      caseworkereligibility worker ofthe existence of an income trust, or that such a trust is to
      be established, and must provide the caseworker with a copy of the trust document.

       An application will not be held longer than 45 days to permit the finalization of an
       income trust. If all eligibility requirements have been met with the exception of income
       in excess of the federal cap and the trust has not been finalized within 45 days since the
       date of application, the application will be denied and the individual or responsible
       party will be informed that reapplication may be made when the trust agreement is
       finalized.

   2. Review for Validity
   3.
      As soon as possible after receiving the trust document, the caseworkereligibility worker
      must submit it through eDoctus to obtain an opinion that the trust document meets the
      requirements of a valid income trust in Arkansas. Refer to MS E-501.
Medical Services Policy Manual, Section H



H-113 Post -Eligibility Procedures
MS Manual 078/1329/152022

   1. Post- Eligibility Consideration of Income

       The total net countable income of an individual will be included in the post- eligibility
       consideration. Net income will be calculated, as for all other MedicaidHealth Care
       eligible individuals, in the post- eligibility process.

       For example, an individual has $2500 net countable monthly income. For post eligibility
       purposes, the calculations will begin with $2500. The PNA, income trust fees,
       spousal/dependent allowances (if applicable, but not in amounts greater than the
       maximum allowed on the DCO-712), and non-covered medical expenses of the recipient
       will be deducted. The balance remaining must then be applied to the individual’s cost of
       care in the facility.

       The caseworker will be responsible for providing the trustee and the recipient or his/her
       representative with a copy of the DCO-712 at initial certification and each time it is
       necessary to make a revision in the post eligibility budget due to income changes or
       other changes such as those made on the DCO-712mandated by the spousal laws.

   2. Begin Date of Eligibility


       Eligibility for facility care or Waiver services shall not begin prior to the month in
       which the trust is established. A trust is considered established when the completed
       documentis signed by the applicant and the trustee. The first possible beginning date
       of eligibility will be the first day of the month in which an approved trust was signed,
       provided that the individual’s income has been placed in the trust account (bank
       account) that month,that no unauthorized funds have been disbursed during the
       month, and that the individual is otherwise eligible. If funds that are not or will not be
       allowed by the DCO-712 have been disbursed from the trust during or after the
       month in which the trust is established, eligibility cannot begin until the first of the
       month in which all disbursements are correctly made.

       It must be verified prior to beginning eligibility that the individual’s income which
       that exceeds the program income limit has been placed in the trust.
 Medical Services Policy Manual, Section H
                                            H-100 Long Term Services and Supports




     3. Trust Balance Exceeds Divisor

         There is no penalty for transfer of income into an income trust fund. However, if the
         balance of the trust at the end of any month (excluding any deposits which that
         represent income for the following month and any spousal,/ dependent,/ or non-
         covered medical expenses amounts specified on the DCO-712 Notice of Action and in
         the electronic record which that were not disbursed for the month) exceeds the
         amount of the current divisor used for transfer of resources (Appendix R),the
         individual will not be eligible again for facility care payment until the first of the month
         after the month in which the balance in the trust has been spent down for the benefit
         of the facility resident. During any such month(s) of ineligibility the spousal,
         dependent, and non-covered medical allowances may be paid according to the DCO-
         712, and MedicaidHealth Care benefits other than the facility vendor payment will be
         continued.

        NOTE: This only applies to facility payments.

 EXAMPLE:        In October 2014, a caseworkereligibility worker learns that an income trust had
                 a $7,208 balance at the end of the preceding month which included a $1,200
                 SSA check depositedthe last day of September, representing payment for
                 October. The trustee failedto make any disbursements for September, including
                 $40 PNA, $600 to the community spouse and $200 for non-covered medical
                 expenses. When the October SSA check and the non-payments for September
                 are subtracted from
$7,208 ($7,208 - $1,200 - $40 - $600 - $200 = $5,168), the remainder is greater than the current
divisor. Therefore, the individual is not eligible for vendor payment in September and the vendor
payment will be stopped for that month.

         For any such month(s) of ineligibility, the caseworkereligibility worker will send a
         DCO-707, Notice ofAdverse Action, to the recipient or representative, and a copy of
         the notice to the trustee.
 Medical Services Policy Manual, Section H


   H-114 Changes to an Income Trust
Refer to Health Care Procedures Manual for more information.
 MS Manual 0708/1329/152022
    1. Medicare and Other Third- Party Payments

        If in any month or part of a month a patient is in a Medicare bed or has other third party
        coverage which lessens or eliminates the obligation of the trustee to pay the facility for
        the patient’s share of cost as computed on the DCO-712 in the electronic record, the
        funds which that would have been paid to the facility in that month shall remain in the
        trust and may not be disbursed for reasons other than for the recipient’s medical care
        for which there is no other third party liability.

        If a trustee has paid the patient’s share of vendor payment at the first of a month and
        later is reimbursed the funds from the facility due to payments from other third party
        coverage, the reimbursement must be returned immediately to the trust. If the facility
        does not make the refund to the trustee, i.e., places the payment(s) in the patient’s
        facility account, the funds placed in the account will be countable toward the $2000
        resource limit.

    2. Client Individual Leaves Facility


        If an individual leaves a facility for a therapeutic home visit (up to fourteen (14) days)
        or for a hospital visit (up to five (5) days), MedicaidHealth Care benefits and vendor
        payment will continue, andthe trustee will make disbursements in that month as
        specified on the DCO-712Notice of Action and in the electronic record.

        If an individual has not returned to the facility after 14 days on a home visit or after 5
        days of hospitalization, Medicaid will no longer pay the vendor payment, and the
        individual will be responsible for arrangements with the facility. Medicaid benefits other
        than the vendor payment may continue unless a formal notice of discharge is sent to the
        DHS County Office via DCO-702 and the recipient has not entered, nor is it anticipated
        that he will enter another facility. During any such period of extended home visit or
        hospitalization when Medicaid is not paying the facility vendor payment, the trustee
        may continue to disburse the spousal/dependent/non-covered medical expenses as
        specified on the DCO-712 and may disburse funds from the trust for medical expenses
        of the recipient which are not specified on the DCO-712 and not covered by Medicaid or
        other insurance.

        The caseworker must determine the residence of a recipient when receiving a DCO-702,
        Notice of Discharge from a facility, because facilities may erroneously send discharge
        notices when an individual has been hospitalized for more than 5 days. A facility may
        also correctly send notice of discharge when an individual has been transferred directly
        from one facility to another, from a hospital to a second facility, or from a therapeutic
        home visit to a second facility. In any of the above situations, the case should not be
 Medical Services Policy Manual, Section H
         closed and Medicaid benefits should not be terminated.

         If an individual improves to the extent that he or she is they are able to return home
         and is are deemed unlikely to need continuing care in a facility according to written
         medical statement, the MedicaidHealth Care case must be closed. However, the trust
         must be maintained according to the terms of the trust, i.e., the individual’s income
         must continue to go intothe trust; no other individual’s income may be put into the
         trust, etc. Disbursements may be made only for medical care, food, clothing,
         transportation, and shelter for the individual.

     3. Changes in Community Spouse or Dependent Status

If a community spouse or dependent who has been receiving a monthly income allowance from
the facility resident enters a facility, has an income change, divorces therecipient, or dies, the
caseworker eligibility worker in charge of the case must be notified within ten (10) days by the
recipient, representative, trustee, or other responsible party. No additional disbursements for
the spouse or dependent can be made until the caseworkereligibility worker has revised the
DCO-712post-eligibility budget and provided the trustee with a copy of the Notice of Action.



    H-115 Reevaluations with an Income TrustRenewals with an Income Trust                               Field Code Changed
 MS Manual 078/1329/152022                                                                              Field Code Changed

 In addition to the required verification of other eligibility factors at annual reevaluationrenewal,
 the caseworkereligibility worker will verify that the individual’s amount required to make the
 client income eligible,income has been placed in the trust and disbursements made as required
 since the last reevaluationrenewal. This may be done by viewing bank statements or other
 trustee records that may be available.

    H-116 Termination of an Income Trust
   Refer to Health Care Procedures Manual for more information.
 MS Manual 078/1329/152022

 Within 10 days of receiving a notification of the death of an individual certified under the
 income trust provision, the caseworker will:

                 Send a Notice of Action to inform the trustee: That if disbursements as
                 specified on the most recent DCO-712 were not made for the month in which
                 death occurred, these disbursements may be made. After these disbursements
                 have been made, no other disbursements may be made from the account until
Medical Services Policy Manual, Section H
                                          H-100 Long Term Services and Supports
                the trustee has received instructions from the DHS Third Party Liability Unit
                section regarding termination of the trust (Form DCO-733).

                Complete Form DCO-734, Report of Case Closure Due to Death, and send the
                form to:

                                Arkansas Department of Human Services
                                Division of Medical Services
                                Third Party Liability
                                PO Box 1437 Slot- S-296
                                Little Rock, AR 72203-1437

                The Third Party Liability Unit will use the information provided in the DCO-734
                to complete and mail the trustee the DCO-733 with instructions regarding
                termination of the trust.

Since income trusts are irrevocable, income truststhey cannot be terminated while the
individual isstill alive, except when:

        OPLS Office of Chief Council (OCC) determines an error was made in the establishment of the trust;, or
        The individual has repaid MedicaidHealth Care all payments made since the
        establishment of theincome trust; , or
        Individual is moving out of state and will be establishing an income trust in the other
        state; , or
        Other extraordinary circumstance.

In all cases, OPLS must authorize the termination of the income trust.
Medical Services Policy Manual, Section H

H-400 Post -Eligibility
MS Manual 0708/0129/20022

The eligibility groups Nursing Facility, Assisted Living Facility, PACE recipients in a nursing facility,
and PACE recipients in the community who have met income eligibility by establishing an
irrevocable Miller iIncome Ttrust, all require certain procedures to complete the determination
of eligibility. These eligibility procedures are explained in the following sections.


H-402 Consideration of Income
MS Manual 078/0129/20022

After the IS has been determined to be resource eligible for Long-Term Services and Supports
(LTSS), income of the IS and CS will be considered as follows:

    1. Income Not From A Trust:

        a. Income received solely in the name of either spouse will be considered income only
           to that spouse. Refer to MS E-432 #5 for “Veteran’s Benefits” exceptions.

        b. If payment of income is made in the names of both the IS and CS, half will be
           considered available to the CS and half to the IS.

         c. If payment of income is made in the names of the
              IS and/oror the CS or both and another person,
              the income will be considered available to each
             spouse in proportion to each spouse’s interest. If
              payment is made with respect to both spouses,
            and no such interest is specified, one half (1/2) of
              the joint interest will be considered available to
                                 each spouse.

    2. Income From A Trust:



        Income from a trust will be considered available to each spouse as provided by the
        trust.or, iI In the absence of a specific provision in the trust, the income will be
        considered available to each spouse as according to the rules in 1. a-c above or as
        directed by the Office of Chief Counsel (OCC) opinion. If the IS or CS established the
        trust, refer to MS H-304 for consideration of income from the trust.

    3. Income Through Property With No Instrument Establishing Ownership:
Medical Services Policy Manual, Section H
        When income is from property which that has no instrument establishing ownership (for
        example,i.e. unprobated or, income-producing heir’s property), one half of the income
        will be considered to be available to the IS and one-half to the CS.

H-403 Rebutting Consideration of Income
MS Manual 078/0129/2022022

The eligibility worker will advise the applicant or representative of the income that will be
considered in the gross income test of the institutionalized spouse (IS).

If the IS or representative disagrees with the treatment of ownership interest in income
(other than from a trust) required by MS H-402, the IS or the representative will be given the
opportunity to rebut the presumption of ownership. To successfully rebut the presumption of
full or partial ownership, the IS or the representative he/she must provide the following
within thirty (30) days of the date on the DHS- 0712, Post Eligibility Income WorksheetNotice
of Action:

    1. A written, signed statement by the IS giving his/her allegation regardingalleging
       ownership, the reason for the applicant’s receipt of the income, or for his/hertheir
       name appearing as an owner on the payment of the income;

    2. Corroborating signed statements from the other owner(s);

    3. A change in the instrument of ownership removing the IS’s name from the instrument or
       a change which that redirects the income to the actual owner(s); and

         4. Copies of the original and revised documents
                        reflecting the change.

A successful rebuttal will result in a finding that supports the individual’s allegation regarding
ownership of the income.

If the individual elects not to rebut the consideration of ownership interest, the eligibility
worker will obtain a written statement from the individual which that documents
his/hertheir election.

If the individual elects not to rebut, does not provide a rebuttal within the allotted time, or does
not provide all of the required evidence, the income produced from the presumed ownership
interest will be used in his/herthe individual’s eligibility determination.

If the individual submits all required evidence within the allotted time, the individual’s
ownership interest will be determined, and the findings will be documented in the case record.
The income from the actual ownership interest (i.e.,that is, the interest determined by the
rebuttal) will be used in the eligibility determination.

When the individual has successfully rebutted ownership of all or a portion of the income,
income payments will be considered available to the IS in proportion to his/hertheir interest (if
any).
 Medical Services Policy Manual, Section H

        NOTE: This section does not apply to federal, state, or other entitlements, pensions, or
         retirement benefits.

 H-410 Factors Used to Determine the Cost of Care
 MS Manual 078/0129/2022202

 Nursing facility recipients are required to contribute all of their monthly income, minus certain
 approved deductions, to the cost of their facility care. MedicaidHealth Care pays the balance of
 the monthlycharges due, based on a per diem rate according to the individual's Level of Care.

        NOTE: ARChoices and DDS Waiver recipients do not contribute to the cost of their care.
 For the contribution to the cost of care guidelines for Assisted Living andPACE
recipients, refer to MS H-412 and MS H-413.

 After determination of resource eligibility and the post-eligibility consideration of income (or
 upon request by the applicant/ or recipient, their spouse, or their representative), the
 Nursing Home Net Income, Community Spouse Minimum Monthly Maintenance Needs
 Allowance (CSMNA), Community Spouse Monthly Income Allowance (CSMIA), and any Family
 Member Allowances (FMA) will be computed in the eligibility system and a Notice of Action
 will be senton form DHS-0712, Post Eligibility Income Worksheet, for the appropriate time
 period.

 Steps for determining the amount of income to be applied to the cost of care are shown below:


 1. Total Earned and Unearned Income

      Total all income of the recipient by type and amount with the following exceptions:

          For State Human Development Centers and Arkansas Health Center residents, interest
          income is not counted in the monthly budget.

          VA Aid and Attendance payments and VA CME/UME will not be counted as income.
          Mandatory deductions and work-related expenses will be deducted from gross earnings.
          Court-ordered child support and court-ordered spousal support will be deducted from
          earned or unearned income.

          An additional amount of up to the current SSI/SPA will be deducted from the earnings of
          residents in 10ten-bed Intermediate Care Facilities for Individuals with Intellectual
          Disabilities (ICF/IID) and State Human Development Centers. Refer to MS H-430.
          LTC insurance payments, whether paid to the facility or directly to the recipient, are not
          considered in the eligibility process but are counted toward cost of care.

 2.    Income Trust Fees (if applicable)

      Deduct the applicable income trust fees. Refer to MS H-111 #3.
Medical Services Policy Manual, Section H
       The monthly service charge for maintaining the trust bank account; and

       Commercially reasonable administrative fees charged by the commercial institution serving as trustee.
3. Personal Needs Allowance

   Deduct the personal needs allowance (PNA).

       Subtract a forty-dollar ($40) $40 PNA for most facility residents.


          NOTE: Facility residents whose only income is SSI will be allowed to keep thirty
   dollars ($30) $30 as their PNA. The PNA of an SSI recipient who also has other income is
   forty dollars ($40)$40. Refer to MS H-420.

   Single veterans and spouses of veterans with no dependents whose VA pensions have
   been reduced to ninety dollars ($90)$90 will be given the full ninety dollars ($90) $90 as a
   personal needs allowance. An additional forty dollars ($40) $40 will not be given. A ninety
   dollars ($90)$90 PNA will not be given to any individual whose VA pension has not been
   reduced to ninety dollars ($90)$90 by the Veterans Administration (VA). If VA later reduces
   the pension to ninety dollars ($90)$90, an income adjustment will be made. Individuals
   should contact the Veterans Administration if they believe they are entitled to a ninety-
   dollar ($90) reduced pension.

       For residents of ICF/IIDs and State Human Development Centers with earned income,
       forty dollars ($40) $40 may be given as a PNA in addition to a disregard of earned
       income up to the current SSI SPA.

       For nursing facility residents with earned income, forty dollars ($40) $40 may be given
       as a PNA in addition to a disregard of up to one-hundred dollars ($100) $100 of their
       monthly earnings, provided there is documentation that a physician has prescribed
       employment activity as a therapeutic or rehabilitative measure. Refer to MS H-430.

4. Community Spouse Monthly Income Allowance (CSMIA)

       A community spouse (CS) may be entitled to a portion of the Institutionalized Spouse’s
       (IS) income. The total amount of the IS’s income, to which the CS is entitled, is the
       CSMIA. It is calculated by adding the Minimum Monthly Maintenance Needs Allowance
       (CSMNA) and the Excess Shelter Allowance and subtracting the community spouse’s
       own income. The CSMNA is capped at a Maximum Monthly Maintenance Needs
       Allowance amount. The excess shelter allowance, CSMNA, and Maximum Monthly
       Maintenance Needs Allowance change annually. They are set by the federal government
       and are based on the Consumer Price Index.

       Shelter costs may include rent or mortgage (including principal and interest), prorated
       taxes and insurance (including personal property taxes and insurance on household
       contents if paid yearly), condominium or cooperative fee (including maintenance
       charges), and the standard utility allowance.

       Shelter costs must be verified. Utilities need not be verified.
Medical Services Policy Manual, Section H
      NOTE: The standard utility allowance is not allowed if utilities are included in rent or if
       someone else is paying the utilities. If only partial utilities are included in rent (e.g.for
       example, water), the full utility allowance may be used.

       The CSMIA will only be deducted to the extent contributed by the IS. If the IS
       contributes an amount less than the computed CSMIA, only the actual amount
       contributed will be deducted from the IS’s gross income,; meaningi.e., the
       actual contributions will be deducted instead of the computed CSMIA. Refer
       to MS H-416.

       An IS may not contribute more than the CSMIA unless under a court order, or unless a
       hearing officer has determined the CS needs income greater than the CSMNA. Refer
       to MS H-208.

       If a court orders the IS to contribute a larger amount for the support of the CS, then the
       amount of support ordered by the court will be used instead of the CSMIA. Any amount
       ordered by a court will not be subject to the limit on the CSMNA.

5.   Family Member Allowance (FMA) When There is a Spouse in the Home

       A dependent family member may be entitled to an allowance. See MS Glossary for
       definition of dependent family member.

       The FMA is computed for each dependent family member by deducting the family
       member’s income from the CSMNA and by dividing the result by three (3).

       The FMA will only be deducted from the IS’s income to the extent that it is actually
       contributed by the IS. If the IS contributes an amount less than the FMA, only the actual
       amount contributed will be deducted from the IS’s gross income (i.e.that is, the actual
       contribution) will be deducted instead of the computed FMA. Refer to MS H-415.

       NOTE: A CS who is an SSI recipient, or who has children receiving SSI, will have the right
       to choose whether to accept a CSMIA or FMA. The result of accepting an allowance may
       be reduction or termination of SSI benefits and MedicaidHealth Care. A dependent
       family member receiving SSI (parent or sibling of the IS) will also be given the same
       choice.

6.      Protected Maintenance Allowance for Dependent Children When There is No Spouse
in the Home

       In certain cases, an allowance may be given from the eligible individual's income for the
       protected maintenance of dependent children living in the home when there is no
       spouse in the home.

       Eligibility for the individual in a facility must be established before consideration is given
       for protected maintenance. If there are dependent children under eighteen (18) years
       of agethe age of 18, the combined income of the children must be less than the
       Medically Needy Income Level (MNIL) for the appropriate number of children in the
Medical Services Policy Manual, Section H
         household to qualify for protected maintenance. Refer to MS O-710 for MNILs.

         In addition to meeting the stated income limitations, the countable resources of the
         dependent children must be within the AABD resource limitations to qualify for
         protected maintenance.

7.       Non-covered Medical Expenses            42 CFR § 435.725; Arkansas Act 892

     Non-covered medical expenses of all facility recipients which that are not subject to
     payment bya third party will be deducted. Per 42 CFR § 435.725, this includes incurred
     expenses for medical or remedial care that are not subject to payment by a third party,
     including -:
         (i) Medicare and other health insurance premiums, deductibles, or coinsurance
             charges; and
         (ii) Necessary medical or remedial care recognized under State state law but not
              coveredunder the Sstate’s MedicaidHealth Care plan, subject to reasonable
              limits the agency may establish on amounts of these expenses.

     Reasonable limits on amounts for necessary medical, or remedial care, not covered
     underMedicaidHealth Care:

         The non-covered expenses must be incurred no earlier than the three-month period
         preceding the month of application.

         The non-covered expenses must be prescribed by a Medical professional
         (e.g.,for example: a physician, dentist, optometrist, chiropractor, etc.).
         Payments for cosmetic or /elective procedures (e.g.,for example,: face lifts or
         liposuction) will not be allowed except when prescribed by a medical
         professional.The expense amount is the least of the fee recognized by
         MedicaidHealth Care, Medicare, or theaverage cost allowed by a commercial health
         insurance plan in Arkansas.

         Expenses incurred as a result of the imposition of a transfer of assets penalty are not
         allowed.
         Expenses resulting from the failure to obtain prior approval from applicable private
         insurance, Medicare, or MedicaidHealth Care, due to the service being medically
         unnecessary, arenot allowed.

         Deduction is not allowed for procedures allowed by MedicaidHealth Care when prior
         authorizationis denied due to the service being medically unnecessary.

         Expenses when a third party (including MedicaidHealth Care) is liable for the
         expenses, even ifprovided by an out-of-network provider, are not allowed.

         General health insurance premiums paid by someone other than the recipient
         (excluding the community spouse) who is not a financially responsible relative and
         repayment is not expected to be paid back to the third party by the recipient, are not
         allowed.
Medical Services Policy Manual, Section H
  The medical expenses must be verified as currently due and unpaid. Future anticipated
  expenses may be used when it is verified that these expenses have occurred with regularity
  in the past and will continue to occur with regularity in the future. Only the non-covered
  medical expenses for the facility recipient may be deducted.

  When there is a contract, between an applicant and a medical provider, and regular
  payments on a medical bill are being made, the monthly payment will be deducted as a
  non-coverable medical expense. When there is no contract, the monthly amount of the
  medical expense being paid may be deducted, with verification that regular payments are
  being made.

  Deduction of medical expenses is not allowed for nursing facility and ICF/IID residents for
  items and services included in the state’s Reimbursement Cost Manual as allowable cost
  items (items the facility will provide). Examples of these include wheelchairs, canes,
  crutches, walkers, ambulance services or enrollment fees for ambulance services (unless
  there is not a MedicaidHealth Care enrolled ambulance provider in the area), other
  transportation services, over-the-counter pain killers, antacids, laxatives, cough syrups,
  suppositories, anti-diarrhea medication, diapers, band-aids, bandages, peroxide,
  antiseptics, etc. Facilities are required to provide these items and services at no
  additional charge to the recipient.
  An income offset for the purchase of eyeglasses, contact lenses, hearing aids, prostheses,
  and dentures can be made only if the following procedure is followed:

         o   The items must be prescribed by a physician or other licensed medical practitioner.
         o   The items must be a part of the recipient’s plan of care. It must be determined by
                     the facility interdisciplinary team that the recipient’s quality of life will
                     be enhancedand that he or she is they are able to utilize the item(s).
         o   The request must be approved by the facility’s Quality Assessment and Assurance
                    Committee.
         o   The cost of the item(s) must be determined.
         o   The recipient or authorized representative must provide the eligibility worker
             with verification of the above. The recipient or authorized representative must
             not makethe purchase or pay the medical bill until the eligibility worker has
             made an adjustment to the patient liability.
  Other allowable medical expenses (if not subject to payment by a third party) include
  without limitation: health insurance premiums, deductibles, and coinsurance; prescription
  drugs not in the MedicaidHealth Care formulary; and physician, hospital, and dental
  charges; etc. These are not subject to approval through the facility’s Quality Assessment
  and Assurance Committee. However, prior to making the purchase or paying the bill, the
  recipient or authorized representative must provide the eligibility worker with proof that
  the item or items were prescribed by a physician or other licensed medical practitioner,
  including proof of the cost. A copy of thehealth insurance bill can be used for proof of
  health insurance premiums, deductibles, andcoinsurance.

  Medicare premiums deducted from SSA payments prior to buy-in are not allowed, as
Medical Services Policy Manual, Section H
    they will be reimbursed. The only allowable medical deductions will be the recipient’s
    noncovered medical expenses. Medical expenses of family members cannot be deducted
    from facility income.

           NOTE: There is no monthly limit on the number of prescription drugs for facility
    recipients receiving vendor payment, as long as the prescribed medicine is within the
    MedicaidHealth Care formulary. MedicaidHealth Care facility recipients who are not
    certified for vendor payment are limited to three (3) prescriptions per month. Nursing
    facility hospice recipientsare eligible for three (3) prescriptions drugs per month, with the
    option of receiving up to six (6) prescriptions with prior authorization.

    Medical expenses can be of three types:

        a. Monthly - Expenses incurred regularlyregularly incurred each month, such as
           the Medicare Part D enhanced plan portion of premiums above the
           benchmark;
        b. Nonmonthly - Expenses which are not incurred monthly but are incurred
           periodically, such as quarterly insurance premiums; or
        c. One-time - Expenses incurred such as hearing aids.

    If the eligibility worker is unable to determine within a fair degree of certainty what the non-
    covered medical expenses will be, then no medical expenses will be deducted from the
    income.

8. Net Income

    After deduction of any applicable excluded earnings, income trust fees, personal needs
    allowance, maintenance allowances, court-ordered child support, court-ordered spousal
    support, and non-covered medical expenses, the net amount remaining will be the
    amount the individual is expected to apply to the cost of care.

    If all of the IS’s gross income is depleted at any step in the computation, the amount applied
    to the vendor payment (cost of care) will be zero dollars ($0).$0.

    After the DHS- 0712post-eligibility budget is completed, a copy of the information will be
    provided to each spouse. If the budget form is completed prior to application, at the
    request of either spouse, the DHS-0712information will only be provided to the spouse
    making the request.

H-412 Contribution to the Cost of Care for Assisted Living Facilities
MS Manual 078/0129/202

Assisted Living Facility (ALF) Waiver recipients are allowed to keep a flat ninety and eight
hundredths of a percent (90.8%) 90.8% rounded up of the SSI/SPA for room and board. This will
allow the individual to purchase food from the facility, or elsewhere, if they prefer. In addition
to the charge for room and board, a monthly personal allowance will be deducted. The personal
allowance will be based on (nine percent) 9% of the SSI/SPA and rounded up. Both will increase
Medical Services Policy Manual, Section H
each January with the SSA/SSI Cost of Living Increases. See Appendix S for current amounts.

The following expenses are to be deducted from the cost of care for the ALF recipient in the
following order:

  1. Room and board payment


           a.           NOTE: If the individual is receiving assistance through HUD, the
                deduction can only befor the amount the individual is actually paying.

  2. Personal needs allowance (PNA)

  2.3. Court-ordered child support and court-ordered spousal support.

  3.4. Monthly medical insurance premiums

  4.5. Non-covered medical expenses including over-the-counter medications and medical supplies

  5.6. Spousal support payments for the community spouse and Family Member Allowance(MS H-410 #4-6)

  6.7. Applicable income trust fees (MS H-111 #3)

  7.8. Earnings up to the monthly SSI/SPA amount if employment is prescribed as therapeutic
       by the attending physician

The ALF recipient’s income, minus room and board, personal allowance, and certain other
expenses, will be contributed to their cost of care each month.

H-413 Contribution to the Cost of Care for PACE
MS Manual 078/0129/2022202

Post-eligibility treatment of income provisions will apply to PACE participants upon entry into a
nursing facility using the procedures for Long-Term Services and Supports (LTSS) nursing facility
MedicaidHealth Care. Refer to MS H-410.

For PACE participants in the community, there is no cost of care unless the individual has income
over the income limit and has established an income trust. For income trust guidelines, refer to
MS H-110.

The eligibility worker will calculate a patient liability amount for those PACE participants in
nursing homes and those who are eligible through establishing an Income Trust. The patient
liability amount will be calculated using the form DHS-0712in the electronic record. The PACE
provider will collect and retain the patient liability. For individuals in nursing facilities, a
personal needs allowance (PNA) equal to the current nursing facility PNA, any applicable
community spouse allowances and/or ,family allowances, court-ordered child support, court-
ordered spousal support, and excess medical expenses will be deducted from the PACE
participant’s monthly income. Refer to MS H-410.
For individuals in the community who are eligible through establishing an income trust, income
in excess of the current LTSS MedicaidHealth Care limit will also be paid to the PACE provider.
Medical Services Policy Manual, Section H
A personal needs allowance equal to the current LTSS/PACE limit of three (3) times the current
SSI standard payment amount (SPA), plus any applicable spousal or family support or excess
medical expenses will be deducted before making payment to the PACE provider.


H-416 Verification or Refusal of Contributions
MS Manual 078/0129/2022202

Prior to certification of the Institutionalized Spouse (IS), the IS or representative must complete
and sign the statement on the reverse of the DHS-0712 to indicate that the IS plans to
contribute the Community Spouse Monthly Income Allowance (CSMIA) and the Family Member
Allowance (FMA) specified on the DHS-0712Notice of Action, during the period of
institutionalization.

If the DHS-0712 is not completed and signedOtherwise, no allowances for the CS or other
family memberswill be used in determining Nursing Home Net Income. The CSMIA and FMA will
only be deducted to the extent actually contributed by the IS.

If the CS does not want to accept the contribution from the IS, the CS should may decline the
incomeby completing the appropriate section on the DHS-0712..

H-430 Earnings of Intermediate Care Facilities for Individuals with
Intellectual Disabilities (ICF/IID) Facility Residents
MS Manual 07/01/20008/29/22

Residents of ICF/IID facilities, including residents of State Human Development Centers, who
have earned income may be given an earnings disregard of up to an amount equal to the
current SSI standard payment amount (SPA) in addition to the forty dollars ($40)$40 personal
needs allowance.

Nursing facility residents with earnings may be given a disregard of up to one-hundred ($100) of
their monthly earnings, provided there is documentation that a physician has prescribed
employment activity as a therapeutic or rehabilitative measure. If a nursing home resident
receiving skilled care reports earnings, the Division of Provider Services and Quality Assurance
(DPSQA) Office of Long-Term- Care (OLTC) should be contacted and requested to reevaluate
medical necessity.

All nursing facility and ICF/IID residents must first pass the gross income test, with no disregards
allowed. If found eligible, the consideration of earnings will be as follows.

    1. Ten- Bed ICF/IID Facilities and State Human Development Centers

        Earnings of residents of these facilities must be taken into consideration for both
        eligibility and net income determinations. If residents pass the gross income eligibility
        test, their earnings will be included in the net income determination. In determining the
        net income to be applied toward the vendor payment, first subtract the mandatory
        deductions (e.g., for example, federal and state income taxes) from gross income and,
        from the remaining earned income, up to an amount equal to the current SSI SPA for
        personal needs. Refer to MS H-410 for consideration of earnings at certification.
    Medical Services Policy Manual, Section H

        2. Fluctuating Earnings

             If the earnings of ICF/IID facility residents stay below the SSI SPA, no reporting of
             fluctuations is needed.

             The facility administrator will report to the eligibility worker any month in which a
             resident’s earnings exceed the SSI SPA.

             If earnings consistently stay above the SSI SPA, they may be averaged (MS E-415),
             provided the facility administrator will agree to report to the eligibility worker:

                     Every six (6) months when earnings are fairly stable, or H-400 Post-
                     Eligibility; or

                     more frequently if the resident loses employment, changes jobs, or has
                     earnings in any month which are more than fifteen dollars ($15) $15 above
                     the computed average.


    H-440 Effective Eligibility Dates for Nursing Homes and Intermediate
    Care Facilities for Individuals with Intellectual Disabilities (ICF/IID)
    Services
    MS Manual 078/0129/20202

    The effective date of eligibility of an applicant for nursing home and ICF/IID depends on three
    (3)factors:

        1. Date of Entry - The individual’s date of entry into a participating facility is indicated on
           the DCO-0702, Notice of Admission, Discharge or Transfer From a Facility, which is
           completed by the facility and forwarded to both the DPSQA Office of Long-Term Care
           and the County Office for initial certification. Vendor payments cannot begin prior to the
           individual’s date of entry into a facility.

        2. Date of Medical Necessity - Medical necessity is determined by the DPSQA Office of
           Long-Term Care. The medical necessity decision is transmitted to the County Office and
           the facility by the DHS-0704, Evaluation of Medical Need Criteria, which classifies the
           patient for a specific level of care. If a DHS-0704 is received by the County Office on an
           applicant which that classifies him/herthem for a specific level of care, medical necessity
           exists to the date of the individual’s entry or to the date of application if the patient was
           accepted as private pay only until the application for MedicaidHealth Care was made.
           However, if the patient is in an ICF/IID facility or was subject to Pre-Admission Screening
           and Annual Resident Review (PASARR), medical necessity begins on the DHS-0704
           decision date, for ICF/IID or PASARR date for PASARR residents, and MedicaidHealth
           Care and vendor payment cannot begin prior to this date.


1.3. Date of Categorical Eligibility - Categorical eligibility for facility care and services under the
 Medical Services Policy Manual, Section H
 AABD criteria can be established to begin three (3) months prior to the date of application,
 provided all eligibility conditions are met. If categorical eligibility is established by receipt of SSI
 or Foster Care, the date to begin vendor payment is not governed by the three (3) -month
 retroactive eligibility limitation as applied under the AABD eligibility criteria. Even though
 categorical eligibility may be established prior to application, however, the begin date for
 MedicaidHealth Care and vendor payment cannot be prior to the decision date on the DHS-
 0704 for ICF/IID applicants or PASARR date for individuals subject to PASARR. Authorization of
 services cannot be made until all three (3) factors have been met.

 H-450 Approval of an Applicant Who is in a Medicare Bed
MS Manual 078/0129/20202

When Medicare approves individuals for skilled nursing care/extended care, the facility receives reimbursement in
the form of Medicare per diem and Medicaid Health Carecoinsurance (if applicable) for up to 100 days, provided the
individual continues to meet Medicare criteria.

Applications for Medicare approved admissions will be processed in the same manner and timeframe as applications
for non-Medicare approved admissions, except that nursing home services will not be authorized until Medicare
benefits have been exhausted. Medicare pays 100% of facility expenses for only 20 days. After this time, the
individual becomes liable for coinsurance, which cannot be paid by Medicaid Health Care until the case is opened.

The monthly Medicare per diem amount will not be considered when determining income eligibility, but it will be
treated as a third-party resource to be applied to the cost of care in a facility.

If at some point, the individual fails to meet Medicare criteria or exhausts his/her benefits, Medicare will stop
payment. The facility will notify the eligibility worker of the change in status. On the day following termination of
Medicare benefits, the eligibility worker may authorize facility services to be effective on that date, provided the
individual continues to meet all Long- Term Services and Supports (LTSS) requirements.

 H-481 Case Adjustments for Lump Sum Payments in Prior Months
MS Manual 078/0129/20202

When a eligibility worker learns that a recipient, who does not have an Income Trust, received a lump sum benefit in
a prior month which caused ineligibility for the month of receipt only, it will not be necessary to close the case if the
recipient regained eligibility the month following the receipt of the lump sum. If the recipient has lost eligibility for
more than one month, then the case will be closed, and a new application will be required.

Overpayment reports for Long-Term Services and Supports (LTSS) and other MedicaidHealth Care categories will be
submitted to recover any MedicaidHealth Care payments made during the month of ineligibility.

Refer to MS Section M. If the facility has retained the lump sum benefits, no overpayment is required to recoup the
vendor payments.



 H-490 Absences from Long TermLong-Term Care Facilities
 MS Manual 078/0129/20202

 All facilities are required to report to the County Office certain recipient absences from the
Medical Services Policy Manual, Section H
facility. Absences will be reported for death, discharge, and transfer. Overnight home visits and
hospitalizations will not be reported. Admissions to the Arkansas State Hospital (Little Rock) will
be reported as discharges.

Death or Discharge

Upon notification from the facility reporting the death or discharge of a recipient, the County
Office will initiate action to close the recipient’s case. Advance notice is not required for closure
due to death.

Home Visits

A recipient receiving long termLong-Term care services has the right to make overnight home
visitswhenever hethey desires, provided they visits are consistent with his the recipient’s
required level of care and histheir attending physician’s orders. This includes authorized home
visits during the thirty (30) days in which institutional status is achieved.


The DPSQA Office of Long-Term Care is responsible for monitoring recipient home visits and
their consistency with the patient’s required level of care. For example, a skilled care patient
who makes overnight home visits might require reclassification action by Long-Term Care.

Facility services may continue during a recipient’s absence due to therapeutic home visit
without regard to the cumulative number of days absent during a calendar year. However, a
fourteen (14) consecutive day limit is placed on each home visit for payment purposes.

Home visits of less than fourteen (14)14 days will not be reported by facilities to the County
Office. The date left counts as the first day of absence. When there is an indication that the
recipient is expectedto return to the facility within fourteen (14)14 days, the County Office will
take no action.

For home visits, which that exceed fourteen (14) 14 consecutive days, facilities will report the
date left and a discharge on the 15fifteenth consecutive day of absence. When there is no
indication that the recipient is expected to return to the facility within fourteen (14) days, the
County Office will initiate action to close the case.

        Cases suspended or closed can be reinstated without new application if the recipient
        returns to the facility within ninety (90) days of the date left on home visit.

        If the reevaluation falls due during the period of suspension, it will not be completed
        until the client reenters the facility.

        If the individual does not reenter the facility within ninety (90) days, a new
        application will be required to reopen the case


H-493 Operations Plan - Relocation of Recipients
MS Manual 078/0129/20202

The Division of Provider Services and Quality Assurance (DPSQA) Office of Long-Term Care
Medical Services Policy Manual, Section H
(OLTC) will initiate all relocation actions of Aagency recipients in facilities which that are closed
for anyreason other than a disaster. Such reasons include decertification by the federal
government orthe DPSQA, loss of licenses, voluntary withdrawal from the MedicaidHealth Care
Program, or cancellation ofagreement by the DPSQA. Since federal regulations require all
program recipients to be relocated within thirty (30) days of the termination date, it is essential
that specific procedures be established to ensure that recipients are relocated with maximum
safety and well-being.

Authority to initiate, direct, and monitor all relocation actions is delegated to the
AssistantDirector of the Office of Long-Term Care, by the Director of the DPSQA.
MEDICAL SERVICES POLICY MANUAL, SECTION H
                                                 H-600 Estate Recovery



H-600 Estate Recovery
MS Manual 078/1329/152022

The Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1993 and Arkansas Act 415 of 1993 mandate recovery
of medical payments correctly made from 8/13/93 August 13, 1993, and later from the estates
of:

        Individuals of any age who were considered to be permanently institutionalized, who
        received medical services in a nursing or ICF/IID facility, and who were required to pay
        all but a minimal amount of income for their care, and for
        Individuals fifty-five (55) years of age age 55 and older who received medical services in
        a nursing or ICF/IID facility or in a home and community based waiver program, whether
        or not they were considered to be permanently institutionalized.

Estate recovery will not be made from the estate of deceased individuals when:

        There is a surviving spouse, dependent children under twenty-one (21) years of age 21,
        or children that who are blind or have a disability (as determined by SSA disability
        guidelines),
        Recovery will create an undue hardship for other surviving family members, or
        Recovery is not cost effective.

Estate recovery will not be made from resources which that were protected as a result of the
individual having a Qualified Long- Term Care Insurance Partnership Policy. The maximum
amount protected at estate recovery will be the amount protected when eligibility was
established. If any of the protected resources have been spent or given away, only the amount
remaining will be protected at estate recovery.

Estate recovery will not be made from interests acquired through grant of a beneficiary deed,
per Act 570 of 2021 when:

        The beneficiary deed was properly excuted and recorded;, and
        Documentation has been provided to the entity seeking recovery.

H-630 Recovery Procedures
MS Manual 07/13/201508/29/2022

State law requires in most cases that the appointed personal representative of the estate of a
deceased person shall promptly mail to the creditors of an estate, including the Department of
Human Services (DHS), a copy of the notice of their appointment which that has been published
in the newspaper. The published notice is to include the requirement that all claims against the
MEDICAL SERVICES POLICY MANUAL, SECTION H
                                                   H-600 Estate Recovery



estate be submitted within six (6) months of the date of publication of the first notice. A copy of
the petition for probate of a will or administration of an estate and the decedent’s Social
Security number shall bewill be attached to the notice forwarded to DHS.

After receiving notice of the opening of an estate or filing of an “Affidavit for the Collection of a
Small Estate”, the TPL Unit will check the MMIS System to determine if the decedent received
MedicaidHealth Care benefits in a nursing facility, ICF/IID facility, or under a home and
community based waiver program.

Property interest established by a properly excuted and recorded beneficiary deed are not
subject to estate recovery per H-600.



TPL will not pursue recovery if:

    1. There is a surviving spouse;
    2. There are surviving minor children;

    3. There are surviving children of any age who are blind or permanently and totally
       disabled as defined in 42 U.S.C. §§ 1381 et seq;

    4. In cases of a home, there is a son or daughter currently lawfully residing in the home
       and was residing in the recipient’s homewhere they have been residing for at least two
       (2) years immediately before the recipient’s admission to the medical institution, and
       who establishes to the satisfaction of the Sstate that he or shethey provided care to the
       recipient which that permitted the recipient to reside in the home rather than in an
       institution;

    5. In cases of a home, there is a sibling currently lawfully residing in the home, and the
       sibling was residing in the home at least one (1) year immediately before the date of the
       recipient’s admission to the medical institution; or,

    6. The recovery is not cost effective.

For factors one (1) through five (5) of the above-listed (MS H-630), recovery is not waived.
Instead, it may be postponed until the individuals identified in those factors die or move from
the home.

If benefits were paid for services in a nursing facility, ICF/IID facility, or home and under a home
and community based waiver program, TPL will mail to the personal representative or the
MEDICAL SERVICES POLICY MANUAL, SECTION H
                                                  H-600 Estate Recovery



distributee of a small estate a Notice of Estate Recovery (DHS-20), advising of the intent to
recover MedicaidHealth Care payments and of the procedures for requesting a hardship waiver.

A payment profile for the decedent will be ordered from the Division of Medical Services (DMS).
When the payment profile is received, a claim against the estate will be prepared for the
signature of the Director of DMS. The claim will be filed with the appropriate Probate Clerk and
a copy mailed to the personal representative, attorney for the estate, or distributee of the
estate.

If no benefits were paid, no further action will be taken.

H-640 Application for a Hardship Waiver
MS Manual 018/0129/1422

The personal representative or distributee of an estate may apply for a hardship waiver at the
time notice of the estate is given to DHS, or within 30 days after receiving notice from DHS of
intent to recover Medicaid Health Care payments and the procedures for requesting a hardship
waiver (DHS- 20). Refer to MS H-730 for procedures.
MEDICAL SERVICES POLICY MANUAL, SECTION H
                                                H-700 Undue Hardship Waiver



H-700 Undue Hardship Waiver
MS Manual 018/0129/142022

An individual may request an Undue Hardship Waiver:

    1. When denied eligibility due to excess home equity;,

    2. When denied nursing facility vendor payment due to a transfer of resources/income for
       less than fair market value;, or

    3. After receiving notice from the Department of Human Services (DHS) of intent to
       recover MedicaidHealth Care payments through the Estate Recovery process.

The individual or aAuthorized rRepresentative will need to provide the caseworkereligibility
worker verification to support the allegation of hardship.

H-710 Hardship Waiver for Home Equity
MS Manual 078/1329/152022

An individual who is denied eligibility due to excess home equity may request an Undue
Hardship Waiver. (Re. MS E-517) An example of a situation in which an undue hardship may
exist is if the individual makes an allegation that the home equity should not be counted
because of a legal impediment to selling or transferring the home.

The caseworkereligibility worker will submit all Home Equity Undue Hardship Waiver requests
and supporting documentation to the Division of Aging and Adult Services Division of County
Operations LTSS Support Unit. A decision on the hardship waiver will be made by the Division of
County Operations (DCO) Hardship Waiver Committee. The caseworkereligibility worker will
send the committee decision and information about the right to appeal the decision to the
person who applied for the waiver. If the person who applied for the waiver disagrees with the
DHS decision, he/shethey may appeal the decision within thirty (30) days’ of receipt of the
notice about the DHS decision (MS J-100).

H-720 Hardship Waiver for Transfer of Resources/Income
MS Manual 078/1329/152022

Once the caseworkereligibility worker has determined that this transfer does not meet an
exception found at MS H-309, and it has’s been determined that the resource/ or income was
not transferred exclusively for some other purpose through a rebuttal found at MS H-312-313, a
hardship waiver may be pursued. An individual who is denied Waiver services or nursing facility
vendor payment due to a transfer of resources or /income for less than fair market value may
request an Undue Hardship Waiver.
MEDICAL SERVICES POLICY MANUAL, SECTION H
                                                  H-700 Undue Hardship Waiver



No penalty period for uncompensated transfer will be imposed upon an institutionalized or
Waiver individual to the extent that it is determined that denial of eligibility would work an
undue hardship. Undue hardship exists if each condition below is met:

    1. Counting uncompensated value would make an individual ineligible;

    2. Lack of assistance would deprive the individual of food, shelter, and care determined to
       be medically necessary;

    3. The individual’s total resources are not great enough to pay for facility care for one (1)
       month; and

    4. The resource(s) cannot be recovered from the individual(s) to whom the resource(s) was
       transferred without compensation due to loss, destruction, theft, or other extraordinary
       circumstance.

Undue hardship does not exist when applying the transfer provisions merely would merely
cause the individual inconvenience or would restrict theirhis lifestyle without putting him them
at risk of serious deprivation.

The individual or the individual’s authorized representative may apply for an undue hardship
waiver. In addition, a representative from the facility in which an individual is residing may apply
for an undue hardship waiver on behalf of the client with either the consent of the client or
his/herthier personal representative. To ensure consistency with decisions regarding what
constitutes a hardship, the caseworkereligibility worker will route all applications for an undue
hardship waiver to the Division of Aging and Adult ServicesDivision of County Operations LTSS
Support Unit.

A decision on the hardship waiver will be made by the DCO Hardship Waiver Committee. The
caseworkereligibility worker will send the committee’s decision and information about the right
to appeal the decision to the person who applied for the waiver. If the person who applied for
the waiver disagrees with the DHS committee’s decision, he/she they may appeal the decision
within thirty (30) days’ of receipt of the notice about the DHS decision (MS J-100).

H-730 Hardship Waiver for Estate Recovery
MS Manual 078/1329/1522

The personal representative or distributee of an estate may apply for a hardship waiver at the
time that notice of the estate is given to DHS, or within thirty (30) days after receiving notice
from DHS of intent to recover MedicaidHealth Care payments and the procedures for requesting
a hardship waiver (DHS-20). To apply for a waiver, the representative or distributee must mail a
statement setting forth the facts which that constitute the undue hardship to:
MEDICAL SERVICES POLICY MANUAL, SECTION H
                                                 H-700 Undue Hardship Waiver



                   Third Party Liability Unit
                   Attention: Decedents’ Estates
                   P. O. Box 1437, Slot S296
                   Little Rock, AR 72203-1437

The statement must set forth the facts which that constitute the undue hardship. Tax returns,
income statements, or other documents which that support the position that estate recovery
would work an undue hardship on the survivors must be submitted. The Third Party Liability
Unit will send the hardship request and supporting documents to the Division of Aging and Adult
Services LTSS Support Unit, Central OfficeDCO Hardship Waiver Committee. In determining the
existence of an undue hardship, the Central Office Hardship Waiver Committee will consider
factors including but not limited to the following:

    1. The estate asset that is subject to recovery is the sole- income- producing asset of
       beneficiaries a beneficiary of the estate;

    2. Without receipt of the proceeds of the estate, a beneficiary would become eligible for
       federal or state benefits;

    3. Allowing a beneficiary to receive the inheritance from the estate would enable a
       beneficiary to discontinue eligibility for federal or state benefits;

    4. The estate asset subject to recovery is a home with a value of fifty percent (50%) or less
       of the average price of homes a home in the county where the homestead is located, as
       of the date of the decedent’s death; and

    5. Other compelling circumstances.

A determination that hardship does not exist will be made if the individual created the hardship
through estate planning in which assets were divested in order to avoid estate recovery.

A decision on the hardship waiver will be made by the DHS Central OfficeDCO Hardship Waiver
Committee.

The DHS committee’s decision and information about the right to appeal the decision will be
sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the person who applied for the waiver. If the
person who applied for the waiver disagrees with the DHS committee’s decision, he/she they
may appeal the decision within thirty (30) days’ of receipt of the notice about the DHS decision
(MS J-100).

If recovery is not made due to the determination of hardship, DHS may decide to recover at a
later time if the conditions which caused the original hardship cease to exist.
          Stricken language would be deleted from and underlined language would be added to present law.
                                           Act 570 of the Regular Session

 1   State of Arkansas                   As Engrossed:       H3/11/21
 2   93rd General Assembly                        A Bill
 3   Regular Session, 2021                                                             HOUSE BILL 1162
 4
 5   By: Representative Maddox
 6   By: Senator B. Ballinger
 7
 8                                     For An Act To Be Entitled
 9                  AN ACT TO AMEND THE LAW CONCERNING BENEFICIARY DEEDS;
10                  TO PROHIBIT THE RECOVERY OF BENEFITS AGAINST AN
11                  INTEREST ACQUIRED FROM A DECEASED RECIPIENT BY A
12                  GRANTEE OF A BENEFICIARY DEED IN CERTAIN
13                  CIRCUMSTANCES; AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES.
14
15
16                                                 Subtitle
17                           TO AMEND THE LAW CONCERNING BENEFICIARY
18                           DEEDS; AND TO PROHIBIT THE RECOVERY OF
19                           BENEFITS AGAINST AN INTEREST ACQUIRED
20                           FROM A DECEASED RECIPIENT BY A GRANTEE OF
21                           A BENEFICIARY DEED IN CERTAIN
22                           CIRCUMSTANCES.
23
24
25   BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF THE STATE OF ARKANSAS:
26
27          SECTION 1.       Arkansas Code § 18-12-608(a)(1)(B), concerning the terms of
28   beneficiary deeds, is amended to read as follows:
29                           (B)(i)    A beneficiary deed transfers the interest to the
30   designated grantee effective upon the death of the owner, subject to:
31                                          (a)    All all conveyances, assignments,
32   contracts, leases, mortgages, deeds of trust, liens, security pledges, oil,
33   gas, or mineral leases, and other encumbrances made by the owner or to which
34   the real property was subject at the time of the owner's death, whether or
35   not the conveyance or encumbrance was created before or after the execution
36   of the beneficiary deed; and



     *DTP065*                                                                    03-11-2021 09:33:47 DTP065
     As Engrossed:    H3/11/21                                                      HB1162


 1                                        (b)   A claim for reimbursement of federal or
 2   state benefits by the Department of Human Services from the estate of the
 3   grantor or the interest acquired by a grantee of the beneficiary deed under §
 4   20-76-436.
 5                                 (ii)   No legal or equitable interest shall vest in
 6   the grantee until the death of the owner prior to revocation of the
 7   beneficiary deed.
 8
 9        SECTION 2.        Arkansas Code § 20-76-436 is amended to read as follows:
10        20-76-436.        Recovery of benefits from recipients' estates.
11        (a)(1)     Federal or state benefits in cash or in kind, including, but
12   not limited to, Medicaid, Aid to Families with Dependent Children
13   [abolished], Transitional Employment Assistance Program, Temporary Assistance
14   for Needy Families, and food stamps distributed or paid by the Department of
15   Human Services as well as charges levied by the department for services
16   rendered shall upon the death of the recipient constitute a debt to be paid.
17                 (2)(A)     The department may make a claim against the estate of a
18   deceased recipient or the interest acquired from the deceased recipient by a
19   grantee of a beneficiary deed under § 18-12-608 for the amount of any
20   benefits distributed or paid or charges levied by the department.
21                          (B)   If a grantee of a beneficiary deed under § 18-12-608
22   makes a written request for a release or disclaimer of the department's
23   interest in the real property described in the beneficiary deed, the
24   department within thirty (30) calendar days of the request shall either:
25                                 (i)    Make a claim against the interest acquired from
26   the deceased recipient by a grantee of the beneficiary deed; or
27                                 (ii)   Provide the requested disclaimer and a release
28   suitable for recording in the real estate records of the county where the
29   real property is located.
30        (b)(1)     The department shall not seek recovery against the estate of a
31   deceased recipient or the interest acquired from the deceased recipient by a
32   grantee of a beneficiary deed under § 18-12-608 for the amount of any
33   benefits distributed or paid or charges levied if the recovery is not cost
34   effective or if the recovery works causes an undue hardship on the heirs or
35   devisees of the decedent's estate or the grantee of a beneficiary deed under
36   § 18-12-608.

                                                2               03-11-2021 09:33:47 DTP065
     As Engrossed:     H3/11/21                                                  HB1162


 1               (2)    In determining the existence of an undue hardship, the
 2   department shall consider factors including, but not limited to, without
 3   limitation the following:
 4                       (A)   The asset subject to recovery is the sole income-
 5   producing asset of the beneficiaries a beneficiary of the estate or the
 6   grantee of a beneficiary deed under § 18-12-608;
 7                       (B)   Without receipt of the beneficiary deed or proceeds of
 8   the estate, a grantee or beneficiary would become eligible for federal or
 9   state benefits;
10                       (C)   Allowing a grantee of a beneficiary deed under § 18-
11   12-608 to receive the interest under the beneficiary deed or a the
12   beneficiary to receive the inheritance from the estate would enable the
13   grantee or beneficiary to discontinue eligibility for federal or state
14   benefits;
15                       (D)   The asset subject to recovery is a home with a value
16   of fifty percent (50%) or less of the average price of homes a home in the
17   county where the homestead is located, as of the date of the deceased
18   recipient's death; or
19                       (E)   There are other compelling circumstances.
20        (c)    To the extent that there is any a conflict between the preceding
21   criteria listed in subsection (b) of this section and the standards that may
22   be specified by the United States Secretary of Health and Human Services, the
23   federal standards shall prevail.
24        (d)    Applicants for federal or state benefits shall be notified in
25   writing in prominent type on the application form that the department may
26   make a claim against their estate or the interest acquired from the applicant
27   by a grantee of a beneficiary deed under § 18-12-608.
28
29                                        /s/Maddox
30
31
32                                    APPROVED: 4/5/21
33
34
35
36

                                           3               03-11-2021 09:33:47 DTP065
          Stricken language would be deleted from and underlined language would be added to present law.
                                           Act 630 of the Regular Session

 1   State of Arkansas
 2   93rd General Assembly                        A Bill
 3   Regular Session, 2021                                                             SENATE BILL 218
 4
 5   By: Senator J. Hendren
 6   By: Representative M. Berry
 7
 8                                     For An Act To Be Entitled
 9                   AN ACT CONCERNING NONCRIMINAL BACKGROUND CHECK
10                   REQUESTS SUBMITTED TO THE DIVISION OF ARKANSAS STATE
11                   POLICE; AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES.
12
13
14                                                 Subtitle
15                            CONCERNING NONCRIMINAL BACKGROUND CHECK
16                            REQUESTS SUBMITTED TO THE DIVISION OF
17                            ARKANSAS STATE POLICE.
18
19
20   BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF THE STATE OF ARKANSAS:
21
22          SECTION 1.        Arkansas Code § 12-12-1001(17), concerning the definition
23   of "nonconviction information" used with regard to criminal history
24   information and reporting standards, is amended to read as follows:
25                   (17)     “Nonconviction information” means a felony arrest
26   information without disposition if an interval of one (1) year has at least
27   five (5) years have elapsed from the date of arrest and no active prosecution
28   of the charge is pending, as well as, any misdemeanor arrest for which a
29   disposition has not been entered, all acquittals, and all dismissals;
30
31          SECTION 2.        Arkansas Code § 12-12-1005, concerning the Identification
32   Bureau of the Division of Arkansas State Police, is amended to add an
33   additional subsection to read as follows:
34          (d)(1)       A background check request for a non-criminal justice purpose
35   that must be completed under state or federal law through the Division of
36   Arkansas State Police shall be submitted to the division by electronic means



     *BPG156*                                                                   1/26/2021 2:08:51 PM BPG156
                                                                                   SB218


 1   through the Arkansas State Police Criminal Background Check System.
 2              (2)    This subsection does not apply to a submission originating
 3   outside the State of Arkansas.
 4
 5        SECTION 3.     Arkansas Code § 12-12-1503(2), concerning the definition of
 6   "arrest records" in regard to the Arkansas State Criminal Records Act, is
 7   amended to read as follows:
 8              (2)(A)     “Arrest records” or “arrest information” means felony
 9   arrest information in which conviction or disposition information has not
10   been entered into the central repository.
11                       (B)   “Arrest records” or “arrest information” does not
12   include:
13                              (i)     Misdemeanor arrest information;
14                              (ii)    Felony arrest information that has a
15   disposition of acquittal, dismissal, or nolle prosequi entered into the
16   central repository; or
17                              (iii)    Felony arrest information if more than three
18   (3) five (5) years have elapsed from the date of the felony arrest;
19
20        SECTION 4.     Arkansas Code § 12-12-1507, concerning the administration
21   of the Arkansas State Criminal Records Act, is amended to add an additional
22   subsection to read as follows:
23        (e)   A background check request for a non-criminal justice purpose that
24   must be completed under state or federal law through the division shall be
25   submitted to the division by electronic means through the Arkansas State
26   Police Criminal Background Check System.
27
28
29                                       APPROVED: 4/12/21
30
31
32
33
34
35
36

                                              2              1/26/2021 2:08:51 PM BPG156

