Source URL: https://codes.findlaw.com/ar/title-20-public-health-and-welfare/ar-code-sect-20-76-436/
Retrieved: 2026-09-23
Note: fetched with curl (browser headers) because the Python fetcher got 403 or a TLS error

Arkansas Code Title 20. Public Health and Welfare § 20-76-436 | FindLaw 

 Skip to main content 

 Find a Lawyer 

 Find a Lawyer

 Legal Forms & Services

 Learn About the Law

 Learn About the Law

 Explore Legal Topics 

 Search Laws by State 

 Search Case Law 

 Search U.S. Codes 

 Legal Professionals

 Legal Professionals

 Legal Professional Resources 

 Law Firm Marketing 

 Blogs

 Find a Lawyer

 Search Legal Topics

 Begin typing to search, use arrow keys to navigate, use enter to select

 Legal Issue 

 More Options 

 Name Search

 Browse Legal Issues

 Browse Law Firms

 Support

 City, ZIP Code or County 

 Enter either your legal issue or location to continue

 Find a Lawyer 

 Search by Legal Topic

 Enter legal topic 

 Get the Information 

 CODES / 
 Arkansas / 
 Title 20. Public Health and Welfare / 
 § 20-76-436 

 Arkansas Code Title 20. Public Health and Welfare § 20-76-436. Recovery of benefits from recipients' estates

 Current as of March 28, 2024 | Updated by Findlaw Staff 

 (a)(1) Federal or state benefits in cash or in kind, including, but not limited to,
 Medicaid, Aid to Families with Dependent Children [abolished], Transitional Employment
 Assistance Program, Temporary Assistance for Needy Families, and food stamps distributed
 or paid by the Department of Human Services as well as charges levied by the department
 for services rendered shall upon the death of the recipient constitute a debt to be
 paid.

 (2) The department may make a claim against the estate of a deceased recipient for
 the amount of any benefits distributed or paid or charges levied by the department.

 (b)(1) The department shall not seek recovery against the estate of a deceased recipient
 for the amount of any benefits distributed or paid or charges levied if the recovery
 is not cost effective or if the recovery causes an undue hardship on the heirs or
 devisees of the decedent's estate.

 (2) In determining the existence of an undue hardship, the department shall consider
 factors including without limitation the following:

 (A) The asset subject to recovery is the sole income-producing asset of a beneficiary
 of the estate;

 (B) Without receipt of the proceeds of the estate, a beneficiary would become eligible
 for federal or state benefits;

 (C) Allowing the beneficiary to receive the inheritance from the estate would enable
 the beneficiary to discontinue eligibility for federal or state benefits;

 (D) The asset subject to recovery is a home with a value of fifty percent (50%) or
 less of the average price of a home in the county where the homestead is located,
 as of the date of the deceased recipient's death; or

 (E) There are other compelling circumstances.

 (c) To the extent that there is a conflict between the criteria listed in subsection
 (b) of this section and the standards that may be specified by the United States Secretary
 of Health and Human Services, the federal standards shall prevail.

 (d) Applicants for federal or state benefits shall be notified in writing in prominent
 type on the application form that the department may make a claim against their estate.

 Previous Part of Code 

 Next Part of Code 

 Back to Chapter List 

 Copy 

 Cite this article: FindLaw.com - Arkansas Code Title 20. Public Health and Welfare § 20-76-436. Recovery of benefits from recipients' estates - last updated March 28, 2024  |
 https://codes.findlaw.com/ar/title-20-public-health-and-welfare/ar-code-sect-20-76-436/ 

 FindLaw Codes may not reflect the most recent version of the law in your jurisdiction. Please verify the status of the code you are researching with the state legislature before relying on it for your legal needs.

 Was this helpful? 

 Yes 

 No 

 Easy to understand 

 Solved my problem 

 Other 

 Missing the information I need 

 Too complicated / too many steps 

 Out of date 

 Other 

 Submit 

 Cancel 

 Search all Arkansas Codes

 Keyword or Citation (Required)

 View Results 

 Welcome to FindLaw's Cases & Codes

 A free source of state and federal court opinions, state laws, and the United States Code. For more information about the legal concepts addressed by these cases and statutes, visit FindLaw’s Learn About the Law.

 Go to Learn About the Law 

 Did FindLaw Help You Understand This Legal Issue?

 Make It a Preferred Google Search Source

 Add to Google 

 Latest Blog Posts

 SEC Opens Door for Crypto-Style Trading of U.S. Stocks 

 A Third of Americans Can’t Name the Three Branches of Government. Here’s Why That Affects Your Rights. 

 Contract Buzz: Sixth Circuit Reversal Highlights Difficulty in Litigation Involving Cannabis 

 New Study: High Rates of Depression, Burnout Continue Among Attorneys 

 Explore all 

 For Legal Professionals

 Practice Management 

 Corporate Counsel 

 Legal Technology 

 Law Students 

 Learn About The Law

 Get help with your legal needs

 FindLaw’s Learn About the Law features thousands of informational articles to help you understand your options. And if you’re ready to hire an attorney,  find one in your area  who can help.

 Go to Learn About the Law 

 Need to Find an Attorney?

 Search our directory by legal issue

 Enter information in one or both fields (Required)

 Legal Issue

 More Options 

 Name Search 

 Browse Legal Issues 

 Browse Law Firms 

 Support 

 City, ZIP Code or County 

 Enter either your legal issue or location to continue 

 Find a Lawyer 

 Copied to clipboard

 Back to Top 

 Questions?

 At FindLaw.com, we pride ourselves on being the number one source of
 free legal information and resources on the web. 

 Contact us.

 Stay up-to-date with how the law affects your life. 

 Sign up for our consumer newsletter.

 ENTER YOUR EMAIL ADDRESS (Required)

 Thank you for subscribing!

 follow us: 

 ABOUT US 

 Our Team 

 Accessibility 

 Contact Us 

 FIND A LAWYER 

 By Location 

 By Legal Issue 

 By Lawyer Profiles 

 By Name 

 SELF-HELP RESOURCES 

 Legal Forms & Services 

 LEGAL RESEARCH 

 Learn About the Law 

 State Laws 

 U.S. Caselaw 

 U.S. Codes 

 LEGAL NETWORK 

 FindLaw.com : Free, trusted legal information for consumers and legal professionals 

 SuperLawyers.com : Directory of U.S. attorneys with the exclusive Super Lawyers rating 

 Abogado.com : The #1 Spanish-language legal website for consumers 

 LawInfo.com : Nationwide attorney directory and legal consumer resources 

 Copyright © 2026, FindLaw. All rights reserved.

 Terms 

 Privacy 

 Disclaimer 

 Cookies 

 Manage Preferences 

 Skip to main content
