Source URL: https://www.law.cornell.edu/regulations/arizona/Ariz-Admin-Code-SS-R9-28-911
Retrieved: 2026-09-23

Ariz. Admin. Code § R9-28-911 - Estate Recovery and Undue Hardship | State Regulations | US Law | LII / Legal Information Institute 

 Please help us improve our site!

 × 

 No thank you 

 Skip to main content 

 Cornell Law
 School 
 Search
 Cornell 

 Toggle navigation 

 Please help
 us improve our site! 

 Support Us! 

 Search 

 About
 LII 

 Who We Are 

 What We Do 

 Who Pays For This 

 Contact Us 

 Get the
 law 

 Constitution 

 Supreme Court 

 U.S. Code 

 CFR 

 Federal Rules 

 Federal Rules of Appellate Procedure 

 Federal Rules of Civil Procedure 

 Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure 

 Federal Rules of Evidence 

 Federal Rules of Bankruptcy Procedure 

 U.C.C. 

 Law by jurisdiction 

 State law 

 Uniform laws 

 Federal law 

 World law 

 Lawyer directory 

 Legal encyclopedia 

 Business law 

 Constitutional law 

 Criminal law 

 Family law 

 Employment law 

 Money and Finances 

 More... 

 Help out 

 Give 

 Sponsor 

 Advertise 

 Create 

 Promote 

 Join Lawyer Directory 

 LII 

 State Regulations 

 Arizona Administrative Code 

 Title 9 - HEALTH SERVICES 

 Ariz. Admin. Code tit. 9, ch. 28 - ARIZONA HEALTH CARE COST CONTAINMENT SYSTEM - ARIZONA LONG-TERM CARE SYSTEM 

 Article 9 - FIRST- AND THIRD-PARTY LIABILITY AND RECOVERIES 

 Ariz. Admin. Code § R9-28-911 - Estate Recovery and Undue Hardship

 Ariz. Admin. Code § R9-28-911 - Estate Recovery and Undue Hardship 

 State Regulations 

 Compare

 A. Any recovery of a claim by AHCCCS against
 a member's estate shall be made only after the death of the member's surviving
 spouse and only at a time: 1. When there
 exists no surviving minor child under age 21; and

 2. When there exists no surviving child who
 receives benefits under either Title II or Title XVI of the Social Security Act
 because the child is blind or disabled as defined in
 42 U.S.C.
 1382 c.

 B. Undue hardship exemption request. A
 member's representative may request an undue hardship exemption. If the
 member's representative wishes to request an undue hardship exemption, the
 member's representative shall submit the request within 30 days from the
 receipt of the notification of the AHCCCS claim against the estate. The
 member's representative shall submit a written statement to AHCCCS describing
 the factual basis for a claim that the property should be exempt from estate
 recovery as provided under this Section. AHCCCS shall respond to the member or
 member's representative in writing within 30 days of receiving an undue
 hardship exemption request, unless the parties mutually agree to a longer
 period of time.

 C. AHCCCS shall
 waive a claim against a member's estate because of undue hardship if any of the
 following situations exist: 1. The estate
 consists only of real property that is listed as residential property by the
 Arizona Department of Revenue or County Assessor's Office, and the heir or
 devisee: a. Owns a business that is located at
 the residential property and: i. The business
 was in operation at the residential property for at least 12 months preceding
 the death of the member,

 ii. The
 business provides more than 50 percent of the heir's or devisee's livelihood,
 and

 iii. The recovery of the
 property would result in the heir or devisee losing the heir's or devisee's
 means of livelihood; or

 b. Currently resides in the residence and: 
 i. Resided there at the time of the member's
 death,

 ii. Made the residence his
 or her primary residence for the 12 months immediately before the death of the
 member, and

 iii. Owns no other
 residence; or

 2. The estate consists only of personal
 property and: a. The heir's or devisee's gross
 annual income for the household size is less than 100 percent of the Federal
 Poverty Level (FPL). New sources of income such as employment or Social
 Security that may not have yet been received are included in determining the
 household's annual gross income; and

 b. The heir or devisee does not own a home,
 land, or other real property.

 D. When the estate consists of both personal
 property and real property that qualify for the undue hardship exemption
 criteria under subsections (B) and (C), AHCCCS shall not grant an undue
 hardship waiver; however, AHCCCS shall adjust its claim to the value of the
 personal property.

 E. AHCCCS shall
 exempt the following income, resources, and property of Native Americans (NA)
 and Alaska Natives (AN) from estate recovery: 
 1. Income and resources from tribal land and
 other resources currently held in trust and judgment funds from the Indian
 Claims Commission or U.S. Claims Court;

 2. Ownership interest in trust or non-trust
 property;

 3. Ownership interests
 left as a remainder in an estate in rents, leases, royalties, or usage rights
 related to natural resources;

 4. 
 Any other ownership interests or rights in a property that has unique
 religious, spiritual, traditional, or cultural significance or rights that
 support subsistence or a traditional life style according to applicable Tribal
 law or custom; and

 5. Income left
 as a remainder in an estate derived from any property listed in subsection
 (E)(1) through (4), that was either collected by a NA, or by a Tribe or Tribal
 organization and distributed to a NA. 

 Notes

 Ariz. Admin. Code §
 R9-28-911 

 New Section made by
 final rulemaking at 10 A.A.R. 1308, effective May 1, 2004 (Supp. 04-1). Amended
 by final rulemaking at 10 A.A.R. 3013, effective September 11, 2004 (Supp.
 04-3). Amended by final rulemaking at 14 A.A.R. 3791, effective November 8,
 2008 (Supp. 08-3). 

 State regulations are updated quarterly; we currently have two versions available.
 Below is a comparison between our most recent version and the prior quarterly release. 
 More comparison features will be added as we have more versions to compare.

 No prior version found.

 State Regulations Toolbox

 Accessibility 

 About LII 

 Contact us 

 Advertise here 

 Help 

 Terms of use 

 Privacy
