Source URL: https://www.azleg.gov/ars/14/10505.htm
Retrieved: 2026-09-23

14-10505 - Creditor's claim against settlor 

 14-10505. Creditor's claim against settlor

 A. Whether or not the terms of a trust contain a spendthrift provision, the following rules apply:

 1. During the lifetime of the settlor, the property of a revocable trust is subject to claims of the settlor's creditors. If a trust has more than one settlor or contributor, the amount the creditor or assignee of a particular settlor may reach may not exceed the settlor's interest in the portion of the trust attributable to that settlor's contribution. This paragraph does not abrogate otherwise applicable laws relating to community property.

 2. Subject to the requirements of this section, with respect to an irrevocable trust, a creditor or assignee of the settlor may reach the maximum amount that can be distributed to or for the settlor's benefit.  If a trust has more than one settlor, the amount the creditor or assignee of a particular settlor may reach may not exceed the settlor's interest in the portion of the trust attributable to that settlor's contribution. This paragraph does not apply to any trust from which any distribution to the settlor can be made pursuant to the exercise of a power of appointment held by a third party or abrogate otherwise applicable laws relating to community property.  A creditor of a settlor:

 (a) Shall not reach any trust property based on a trustee's, trust protector's or third party's power, whether or not discretionary, to pay or reimburse the settlor for any income tax on trust income or trust principal that is payable by the settlor under the law imposing the tax or to pay the tax directly to any taxing authority.

 (b) Is not entitled to any payment or reimbursement that is to be made directly to any taxing authority.

 (c) Shall not reach or compel distributions to or for the benefit of the beneficiary of a special needs trust.

 3. After the death of a settlor, and subject to the settlor's right to direct the source from which liabilities will be paid, the property of a trust that was revocable at the settlor's death is subject to claims of the settlor's creditors, costs of administration of the settlor's estate, the expenses of the settlor's funeral and disposal of remains and statutory allowances to a surviving spouse and children to the extent the settlor's probate estate is inadequate to satisfy those claims, costs, expenses and allowances, except to the extent that state or federal law exempts any property of the trust from these claims, costs, expenses or allowances.  If a trust has more than one settlor or contributor, the amount the creditor or assignee of a particular settlor may reach may not exceed the settlor's interest in the portion of the trust attributable to that settlor's contribution.  This paragraph does not abrogate otherwise applicable laws relating to community property.

 B. For the purposes of this section:

 1. During the period the power may be exercised, the holder of a power of withdrawal is treated in the same manner as the settlor of a revocable trust to the extent of the property subject to the power.

 2. On the lapse, release or waiver of a power of withdrawal, the holder is not, by reason of any such power of withdrawal, treated as the settlor of the trust.

 C. For the purposes of this section, a trust settled or established by a corporation, professional corporation, partnership, limited liability company, governmental entity, trust, foundation or other entity is not deemed to be settled or established by its directors, officers, shareholders, partners, members, managers, employees, beneficiaries or agents.

 D. For the purposes of this section, amounts contributed to a trust by a corporation, professional corporation, partnership, limited liability company, governmental entity, trust, foundation or other entity are not deemed to have been contributed by its directors, officers, shareholders, partners, employees, beneficiaries or agents. Powers, duties or responsibilities granted to or reserved by the settlor pursuant to the trust and any actions or omissions taken pursuant to the trust are deemed to be the powers, responsibilities, duties, actions or omissions of the settlor and not those of its directors, officers, shareholders, partners, members, managers, employees, beneficiaries or agents.

 E. For the purposes of this section, amounts and property contributed to the following trusts are not deemed to have been contributed by the settlor, and a person who would otherwise be treated as a settlor or a deemed settlor of the following trusts shall not be treated as a settlor:

 1. An irrevocable inter vivos marital trust that is treated as qualified terminable interest property under section 2523(f) of the internal revenue code if the settlor is a beneficiary of the trust after the death of the settlor's spouse.

 2. An irrevocable inter vivos marital trust that is treated as a general power of appointment trust under section 2523(e) of the internal revenue code if the settlor is a beneficiary of the trust after the death of the settlor's spouse.

 3. An irrevocable inter vivos trust for the settlor's spouse if the settlor is a beneficiary of the trust after the death of the settlor's spouse.

 4. An irrevocable trust for the benefit of a person, the settlor of which is the person's spouse, regardless of whether or when the person was the settlor of an irrevocable trust for the benefit of that spouse.

 5. An irrevocable trust for the benefit of a person to the extent that the property of the trust was subject to a general power of appointment in another person.

 F. For the purposes of subsection E, a person is a beneficiary whether so named under the initial trust instrument or through the exercise by that person's spouse or by another person of a limited or general power of appointment.

 G. Subsections C and D do not apply to:

 1. A trust that has no valid business purpose and that has as its principal purpose the evasion of the claims of the creditors of the persons or entities listed in those subsections.

 2. A trust that would be treated as a grantor trust pursuant to sections 671 through 679 of the internal revenue code.  This paragraph does not apply to a qualified subchapter S trust that is treated as a grantor trust solely by application of section 1361(d) of the internal revenue code.
