Source URL: https://web.archive.org/web/20260801174217id_/https://www.dhcs.ca.gov/services/estate-recovery-program/
Retrieved: 2026-09-23

Estate Recovery Program | DHCS 

 Skip to content 

 CA.gov 

 Official website of the 
 State of California 

 Translate 

 Translate

 Close 

 English 

 Español (Spanish) 

 简体中文 (Simplified Chinese) 

 繁體中文 (Traditional Chinese) 

 Tagalog (Tagalog) 

 Tiếng Việt (Vietnamese) 

 한국어 (Korean) 

 فارسی (Farsi) 

 Հայերեն (Armenian) 

 العربية (Arabic) 

 हिंदी (Hindi) 

 Русский (Russian) 

 日本語 (Japanese) 

 ਪੰਜਾਬੀ (Punjabi) 

 ภาษาไทย (Thai) 

 Hmoob (Hmong) 

 ລາວ (Lao) 

 Українська (Ukrainian) 

 ខ្មែរ (Khmer) 

 Disclaimer 

 Search 

 Services 

 Individuals 

 Providers & Partners 

 Resources 

 Data & Statistics 

 Forms, Laws, & Publications  

 Laws & Regulations 

 About 

 Home Services Estate Recovery Program 

 Estate Recovery Program

 What is Estate Recovery? 

 The Medi-Cal program must seek repayment from the estates of certain deceased Medi-Cal beneficiaries.  Repayment only applies to benefits received by these beneficiaries on or after their 55th birthday and those who owned assets at the time of death.  If a deceased beneficiary owns nothing when they die, nothing will be owed.

 For Medi-Cal members who died 
 on or after January 1, 2017 : (See Changes to Estate Recovery effective January 1, 2017 due to Legislation SB 833 )

 Repayment will be limited only to estate assets subject to probate that were owned by the deceased beneficiary at the time of death.

 Repayment will be limited to payments made, including managed care premiums paid, for nursing facility services, home and community based services, and related hospital and prescription drug services received when the beneficiary was an inpatient in a nursing facility or received home and community based services.

 For Medi-Cal beneficiaries who died 
 prior to January 1, 2017 : 

 Repayment will be sought from all assets owned by the deceased beneficiary at the time of death.        

 Repayment will be owed for payments made for most services received and/or monthly managed care premiums paid on behalf of the Medi-Cal beneficiary.

 Submitting Notice of Death

 If you are the person handling the affairs of the deceased Medi-Cal beneficiary, you must provide “Notice of Death” to the Director of DHCS within 90 days of the date of death with a copy of the death certificate. To satisfy the 
 “Notice of Death” requirement and for fastest processing, complete and submit online the “Notice of Death” form with a copy of the death certificate.  You may also mail 
 “Notice of Death” with a copy of the death certificate to DHCS at: Department of Health Care Services, Estate Recovery Program, MS 4720, P.O. Box 997425, Sacramento, CA 95899-7425. 

 Exemptions/Waivers 

 Specific limitations or 
 exemptions may apply. The Department of Health Care Services (DHCS) may waive its claim if payment of the claim would cause a substantial hardship. Any request for a substantial 
 hardship waiver must be submitted to DHCS within 60 days of the date on the DHCS Estate Recovery claim letter. 

 Applications for Hardship Waiver and other documentation pertaining to Hardship Waiver Applications can be submitted via email to HW@DHCS.CA.GOV or by mail. 

 Certain income and resources of American Indians and Alaska Natives are exempt from Estate Recovery. Please be sure to inform DHCS if the decedent’s property is on or near a federally recognized reservation, Pueblo, or Colony. A collection representative will contact you to clarify if DHCS can or cannot collect against these assets. For specific details on what assets are exempt from Estate Recovery please see the  State Medicaid Manual, Section 3810 (7) and (8). 

 Pay a Claim 

 When you receive our claim amount and are ready to submit payment, we accept 
 Electronic Fund Transfers (EFT) and checks. Regardless of which method you use to pay, you will need your DHCS Account Number to ensure payment is posted to the correct account.

 Contact Information 

 Estate Recovery Email:  ER@DHCS.CA.GOV 

 Hardship Waiver Email: HW@DHCS.CA.GOV 

 Phone: (916) 650-0590

 Mailing address for written correspondence:

 Department of Health Care Services
Third Party Liability and Recovery Division
Estate Recovery Program - MS 4720
P.O. Box 997425
Sacramento, CA 95899-7425

 Mailing address for payments:

 Department of Health Care Services
Third Party Liability and Recovery Division
Estate Recovery Program - MS 4720
P.O. Box 997421
Sacramento, CA 95899-7421

 Request for Medi-Cal Expenses Subject to Estate Recovery

 Medi-Cal members or their authorized representative may submit a 
 Request for Medi-Cal Expenses Subject to Estate Recovery , form DHCS 4017, once per calendar year for a five dollar ($5) processing fee if the current or former member meets either of the following descriptions:

 a.    An individual who is 55 years of age or older when the individual received health care services.

 b.    A permanently institutionalized individual who is an inpatient in a nursing facility, intermediate care facility of the intellectually disabled, or other medical institution. 

 Back to top 

 About

 About DHCS 

 Careers 

 Contact 

 DHCS Websites

 Health Care Options 

 Medi-Cal Dental 

 Medi-Cal Rx 

 Medi-Cal Providers 

 Leadership

 Governor 

 CalHHS Secretary 

 DHCS Director 

 State Medicaid Director 

 Accountability

 Report Medi-Cal Fraud 

 File a Complaint 

 Treatment Facility Violations 

 Campaigns

 Register to Vote 

 Accessibility Certification 

 Conditions of Use 

 Language Access Plan 

 Multilingual Resources 

 Non-Discrimination Policy 

 Privacy Policy Statement 

 Sitemap 

 Facebook 

 Twitter 

 LinkedIn 

 Instagram 

 CA.gov 

 Copyright ©2026 State of California
