Source URL: https://california.public.law/codes/probate_code_section_9202
Retrieved: 2026-09-23

California Probate Code section 9202 (2025) 

California.Public.Law

 California Codes 

 Remove ads 

 Login 

 Codes 

 Probate Code 

 Div. 7 

 Part 4 

 Claims by Pub. Entities 

 § 9202

Probate Code section 9202

 (a)
Not later than 90 days after the date letters are first issued to a general personal representative, the general personal representative or estate attorney shall give the Director of the State Department of Health Care Services notice of the decedent’s death in the manner provided in Section 215 , or submitted electronically to the director through the department’s official internet website using the online notice of death form, if the general personal representative knows or has reason to believe that the decedent received health care under Chapter 7 (commencing with Section 14000) or Chapter 8 (commencing with Section 14200) of Part 3 of Division 9 of the Welfare and Institutions Code, or was the surviving spouse of a person who received that health care. The director has four months after notice is given in which to file a claim. 
 (b)
Not later than 90 days after the date letters are first issued to a general personal representative, the general personal representative or estate attorney shall give the Director of the California Victim Compensation Board notice of the decedent’s death in the manner provided in Section 216 if the general personal representative or estate attorney knows that an heir or beneficiary is or has previously been confined in a prison or facility under the jurisdiction of the Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation or confined in any county or city jail, road camp, industrial farm, or other local correctional facility. The director of the board shall have four months after that notice is received in which to pursue collection of any outstanding restitution fines or orders. 
 (c)
(1)Not later than 90 days after the date letters are first issued to a general personal representative, the general personal representative or estate attorney shall give the Franchise Tax Board notice of the administration of the estate. The notice shall be given as provided in Section 1215 . 
 (2)
The provisions of this subdivision shall apply to estates for which letters are first issued on or after July 1, 2008. 
 (d)
Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring the estate attorney, the beneficiary, the personal representative, or the person in possession of property of the decedent to conduct an additional investigation to determine whether a decedent has an heir or beneficiary who has been confined in a prison or facility under the jurisdiction of the Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation, or its Division of Juvenile Facilities, or confined in any county or city jail, road camp, industrial farm, or other local correctional facility. 
 (e)
(1)Not later than 90 days after the date letters are first issued to a general personal representative, the general personal representative or estate attorney shall give notice of the decedent’s death to the Director of the California Department of Child Support Services, in the manner provided by Section 1215 , or submitted electronically to the director through the department’s official internet website in a manner to be determined by the department, if the general personal representative or estate attorney knows or has reason to believe that the decedent had a child support obligation under an order issued by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
 (2)
A local child support agency providing services pursuant to Division 17 (commencing with Section 17000 ) of the Family Code may assert a claim no later than four months after receiving notice under this subdivision. 
 (3)
This subdivision applies to estates for which letters are first issued on or after January 1, 2026. 

 Source: 
 Section 9202 , https://leginfo.­legislature.­ca.­gov/faces/codes_displaySection.­xhtml?lawCode=PROB§ionNum=9202.­ (updated Jan. 1, 2026; accessed Sep. 21, 2026).

 9200

 9201

 9202

 9203

 9204

 9205

Up to date

 Verified: 

Sep. 21, 2026

§ 9202's source at
 ca​.gov 

 Stay Connected

Join thousands of people who receive monthly site updates.

 Subscribe 

 Get Legal Help

The State Bar of California runs a service for finding
an attorney in good standing. Initial consultations
are usually free or discounted: Certified Lawyer Referral Services Directory 

 Committed to Public Service

We will always provide free access to the current law. In addition,
 we provide special support 
for non-profit, educational, and government users. Through social
entre­pre­neurship, we’re lowering the cost of legal services and
increasing citizen access.

 Navigate

 Find a Lawyer 

 Blog 

 About Us 

 API 

 Contact Us 

 Reports 

 Secondary Sources 

 Privacy Policy 

 California: 
 Codes 

 Colorado: 
 C.R.S. 

 Florida: 
 Statutes 

 Nevada: 
 NRS 

 New York: 
 Laws 

 Oregon: 
 OAR , ORS 

 Texas: 
 Statutes 

 World: 
 Rome Statute , International Dictionary 

 Location: 
 https://california.public.law/codes/probate_code_section_9202 

 Original Source: 
 Section 9202 ,
 https://leginfo.­legislature.­ca.­gov/faces/codes_displaySection.­xhtml?lawCode=PROB§ionNum=9202.­ 
(last ac­cessed Dec. 1, 2025).

 Blank Outline Levels

 × 

 The legislature occasionally skips outline levels.
 For example:

 (3) A person may apply [...]
(4)(a) A person petitioning for relief [...] 

 In this example, (3) , (4) ,
 and (4)(a) are all outline levels, but 
 (4) was
 omitted by its authors. It's only implied. This presents an
 interesting challenge when laying out the text. We've
 decided to display a blank section with this note, in order
 to aide readability.

 Trust but verify. 

 Here is the original source for section 9202 

 Do you have an opinion about this solution?
 Drop us a line. 

 Close
