Source URL: https://california.public.law/codes/probate_code_section_5302
Retrieved: 2026-09-23

California Probate Code section 5302 (2025) 

California.Public.Law

 California Codes 

 Remove ads 

 Login 

 Codes 

 Probate Code 

 Div. 5 

 Part 2 

 Ownership Between Parties & Their Creditors and Successors 

 § 5302

Probate Code section 5302

 Subject to Section 5040 : 
 (a)
Sums remaining on deposit at the death of a party to a joint account belong to the surviving party or parties as against the estate of the decedent unless there is clear and convincing evidence of a different intent. If there are two or more surviving parties, their respective ownerships during lifetime are in proportion to their previous ownership interests under Section 5301 augmented by an equal share for each survivor of any interest the decedent may have owned in the account immediately before the decedent’s death; and the right of survivorship continues between the surviving parties. 
 (b)
If the account is a P.O.D. account: 
 (1)
On death of one of two or more parties, the rights to any sums remaining on deposit are governed by subdivision (a). 
 (2)
On death of the sole party or of the survivor of two or more parties, (A) any sums remaining on deposit belong to the P.O.D. payee or payees if surviving, or to the survivor of them if one or more die before the party, (B) if two or more P.O.D. payees survive, any sums remaining on deposit belong to them in equal and undivided shares unless the terms of the account or deposit agreement expressly provide for different shares, and (C) if two or more P.O.D. payees survive, there is no right of survivorship in the event of death of a P.O.D. payee thereafter unless the terms of the account or deposit agreement expressly provide for survivorship between them. 
 (c)
If the account is a Totten trust account: 
 (1)
On death of one of two or more trustees, the rights to any sums remaining on deposit are governed by subdivision (a). 
 (2)
On death of the sole trustee or the survivor of two or more trustees, (A) any sums remaining on deposit belong to the person or persons named as beneficiaries, if surviving, or to the survivor of them if one or more die before the trustee, unless there is clear and convincing evidence of a different intent, (B) if two or more beneficiaries survive, any sums remaining on deposit belong to them in equal and undivided shares unless the terms of the account or deposit agreement expressly provide for different shares, and (C) if two or more beneficiaries survive, there is no right of survivorship in event of death of any beneficiary thereafter unless the terms of the account or deposit agreement expressly provide for survivorship between them. 
 (d)
In other cases, the death of any party to a multiparty account has no effect on beneficial ownership of the account other than to transfer the rights of the decedent as part of the decedent’s estate. 
 (e)
A right of survivorship arising from the express terms of the account or under this section, a beneficiary designation in a Totten trust account, or a P.O.D. payee designation, cannot be changed by will. 

 Source: 
 Section 5302 , https://leginfo.­legislature.­ca.­gov/faces/codes_displaySection.­xhtml?lawCode=PROB§ionNum=5302.­ (updated Jan. 1, 2016; accessed Sep. 21, 2026).

 5301

 5302

 5303

 5304

 5305

 5306

 5307

Up to date

 Verified: 

Sep. 21, 2026

§ 5302's source at
 ca​.gov 

 Stay Connected

Join thousands of people who receive monthly site updates.

 Subscribe 

 Get Legal Help

The State Bar of California runs a service for finding
an attorney in good standing. Initial consultations
are usually free or discounted: Certified Lawyer Referral Services Directory 

 Committed to Public Service

We will always provide free access to the current law. In addition,
 we provide special support 
for non-profit, educational, and government users. Through social
entre­pre­neurship, we’re lowering the cost of legal services and
increasing citizen access.

 Navigate

 Find a Lawyer 

 Blog 

 About Us 

 API 

 Contact Us 

 Reports 

 Secondary Sources 

 Privacy Policy 

 California: 
 Codes 

 Colorado: 
 C.R.S. 

 Florida: 
 Statutes 

 Nevada: 
 NRS 

 New York: 
 Laws 

 Oregon: 
 OAR , ORS 

 Texas: 
 Statutes 

 World: 
 Rome Statute , International Dictionary 

 Location: 
 https://california.public.law/codes/probate_code_section_5302 

 Original Source: 
 Section 5302 ,
 https://leginfo.­legislature.­ca.­gov/faces/codes_displaySection.­xhtml?lawCode=PROB§ionNum=5302.­ 
(last ac­cessed May 12, 2025).

 Blank Outline Levels

 × 

 The legislature occasionally skips outline levels.
 For example:

 (3) A person may apply [...]
(4)(a) A person petitioning for relief [...] 

 In this example, (3) , (4) ,
 and (4)(a) are all outline levels, but 
 (4) was
 omitted by its authors. It's only implied. This presents an
 interesting challenge when laying out the text. We've
 decided to display a blank section with this note, in order
 to aide readability.

 Trust but verify. 

 Here is the original source for section 5302 

 Do you have an opinion about this solution?
 Drop us a line. 

 Close
