Source URL: https://web.archive.org/web/20250322184842id_/https://www.dhcs.ca.gov/formsandpubs/laws/Documents/16-030_ApvPkg.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-09-23

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH & HUMAN SERVICES
Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services
San Francisco Regional Office
90 Seventh Street, Suite 5-300 (5W)
San Francisco, CA 94103-6706

DIVISION OF MEDICAID & CHILDREN’S HEALTH OPERATIONS

                                                             March 24, 2017

Mari Cantwell
Chief Deputy Director, Health Care Programs
California Department of Health Care Services
P.O. Box 997413, MS 0000
Sacramento, CA 95899-7413

Dear Ms. Cantwell:

Enclosed is an approved copy of California State Plan Amendment (SPA) CA 16-030, which
was submitted to the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) on December 29,
2016. This amendment makes various changes to the Medi-Cal program's estate recovery
program, including limiting estate recovery to probated estates for only federally-mandated
services; adding a hardship waiver criterion for a "homestead of modest value;" eliminating
recovery from surviving spouses and registered domestic partners; and updating the interest
rate for voluntary liens.

The effective date of this SPA is January 1, 2017. Enclosed are the following approved
SPA pages that should be incorporated into your approved state plan:

      •   Section 4.17, page 53a and 53c
      •   Attachment 4.17-A, pages 1, 2, 2a, 3, 4, 5 and 6
If you have any questions, please contact Cheryl Young at 415-744-3598 or via email at
Cheryl.Young@cms.hhs.gov.

                                        Sincerely,



                                        Henrietta Sam-Louie
                                        Associate Regional Administrator
                                        Division of Medicaid & Children’s Health Operations


cc:       Lindsey Wilson, California Department of Health Care Services (DHCS)
          Nathaniel Emery, DHCS
          Wendy Ly, DHCS
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES                                                                                       FORM APPROVED
CENTERS FOR MEDICARE & MEDICAID SERVICES                                                                                     0MB No. 0938-0193

                                                                      1.1. TRANSMITTAL
                                                                           TRANSMITTAL NUMBER                   2. STATE
    TRANSMITTAL AND NOTICE OF APPROVAL OF
             STATE PLAN MATERIAL
                                                                      NUMBER:
                                                                            --
                                                                            1  6  16-030
                                                                                   -0
                                                                                       --- 3  0                  California
    FOR: CENTERS FOR MEDICARE & MEDICAID SERVICES                      3. PROGRAM IDENTIFICATION: TITLE XIX OF THE SOCIAL
                                                                          SECURITY ACT (MEDICA ID)

 TO: REGIONAL ADMINISTRATOR                                            4. PROPOSED EFFECTIVE DATE
     CENTERS FOR MEDICARE & MEDICA ID SERVICES
     DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES                           01/01/2017
5.5. TYPE
     TYPE OF PLAN MATERIAL (Check One)
              OF PLAN MATERIAL (Check One): selected response-amendment
      0 NEW STATE PLAN                O AMENDMENT TO BE CONSIDERED AS NEW PLAN                            liJ AMENDMENT
                   COMPLETE BLOCKS 6 THAU 10 IF THIS IS AN AMENDMENT (Separate transmittal for each amendment)
  6. FEDERAL STATUTE/REGULATION CITATION                              7.7. FEDERAL
                                                                           FEDERAL BUDGET        IMPACT
                                                                                                                        l'i 5.2..4    S.(O CV"-1
                                                                            a. FFY 20,s-2011
                                                                                          BUDGET     IMPACT a. FFY           2016-2017:
                                                                                                        $�                .1       '          .;
 1917(b) of the Social Security Act                                                                     $.:lll,B1s.see-
                                                                            b. FFY 2011.201sb. FFY 2017-2018:
                                                                      $14,524,850                                       3.:?, �.2.S.., ODO U
                                                                                                                   $32,525,000
  8. PAGE NUMBER OF THE PLAN SECTION OR ATTACHMENT                     9. PAGE NUMBER OF THE SUPERSEDED PLAN SECTION
                                                                          OR ATTACHMENT (If Applicable)
 Section 4.17 page 53a, 53c, Attachment 4. 17-A pages
 1,2,2a,3,4,5,6                                                         Section 4. 17 page 53a,53c, Attachment 4. 17-A
                                                                        pages 1-6 *



 10. SUBJECT OF AMENDMENT
 Limit estate recovery to probated estates for only federally mandated services, add hardship waiver criterion for a "homestead of
 modest value," eliminate recovery from surviving spouses and registered domestic partners, and update the interest rate for
 voluntary liens.
 11. GOVERNOR'S REVIEW (Check One)
11   GOVERNOR'S REVIEW (Check one): selected response: Other, as specified:
      0 GOVERNOR'S OFFICE REPORTED NO COMMENT               X OTHER, AS SPECIFIED: The Governor's Office does
the governor's     office   does    not  wish
      0 COMMENTS OF GOVERNOR'S OFFICE ENCLOSED to  review the
                                                            notstate
                                                               wish toplan
                                                                       reviewamendment
                                                                              the State Plan Amendment.
      0 NO REPLY RECEIVED WITHIN 45 DAYS OF SUBMITTAL
ORIGINAL SIGNED




 FORM CMS-179 (07/92)                                   Instructions on Back
                                                    53a

 Revision: HCFA-PM-95-3 (MB)
           MAY 1995

                     STATE PLAN UNDER TITLE XIX OF THE SOCIAL SECURITY ACT

                                       State/Territory: California


                                 (b) Adjustments or Recoveries

                                    The State complies with the requirements of section 1917(b) of the Act
                                    and regulations at 42 CFR 433.36(h) - (i).

                                    Adjustments or recoveries for Medicaid claims correctly paid are as
                                    follows:

                                    (1) For individuals permanently residing in an institution, adjustments or
                                        recoveries are made from the individual’s estate or upon sale of the
                                        property subject to a lien imposed because of medical assistance paid
                                        on behalf of the individual for services provided in a nursing facility,
                                        ICF/MR, or other medical institution.

                                        _ __ Adjustments or recoveries are made for all other medical
                                               assistance paid on behalf of the individual.

                                    (2)
                                     (2) The  State
                                          _____ Thedetermines      “an individual
                                                      State determines             permanently
                                                                         “an individual            residing
                                                                                         permanently          in in
                                                                                                       residing  anan
                                                institution status” of individuals under   the age of 55 other
                                    institution status” of individuals under the age of 55 other than those     than
                                                those with respect to whom it imposes liens on real property
                                    with respect   to whom
                                                under         it 1917(a)(1)(B)
                                                        section  imposes liens(even
                                                                                 on real
                                                                                      if it property  under those
                                                                                            does not impose
                                    section 1917(a)(1)(B)
                                                liens).       (even if it does not impose those liens).

                                    (3) For any individual who received medical assistance at age 55 or
                                        older, adjustments or recoveries of payments are made from the
                                        individual’s estate for nursing facility services, home and community-
                                        based services, and related hospital and prescription drug services.

                                        (response
                                        __X__ In selected)     In adjustment
                                                     addition to  addition to adjustment
                                                                               or recoveryorofrecovery of payments
                                                                                                payments              for
                                                                                                            for services
                                        serviceslisted
                                                  listed above,
                                                         above, payments
                                                                 payments areare adjusted
                                                                                 adjustedororrecovered
                                                                                               recoveredforforother
                                                                                                                other
                                        servicesservices
                                                  under theunder
                                                             Statethe  State
                                                                    plan      planbelow:
                                                                         as listed  as listed below:

                                                For individuals who die prior to January 1, 2017, all services
                                                included in State plan for recipients age 55 and over except
                                                those payments made for personal care services provided
                                                under In-Home Support Services, and all Medicare cost
                                                sharing as identified in section 4.17(b)(3)

                                                For individuals who die on or after January 1, 2017, the State
                                                will recover only for the services required by the State
                                                Medicaid Manual, Section 3810(A)(2) (Continued).


 __________________________________________________________________________________
TN No. 16-030
 TN No. 16-030
Supersedes TN No.
 Supersedes
10-009
                         Approval Date: March 24, 2017                  Effective Date January 1, 2017
 TN No. 10-009
                                                     Page 53c

Revision: HCFA-PM-95-3 (MB)
         May 1995

                               STATE PLAN UNDER TITLE XIX OF THE SOCIAL SECURITY ACT

                                             State/Territory: California

                                               (c)   Adjustments or Recoveries: Limitations

                                                     The State complies with the requirements of section
                                                     1917 (b) (2) of the Act and regulations at 42 CFR
                                                     section 433.36 (h) - (i)
                                                     (1) Adjustment or recovery of medical assistance correctly paid
                                                         will be made only after the death of the individual's surviving
                                                         spouse, and only when the individual has no surviving child
                                                         who is either under age 21, blind, or disabled.

                                                          (a) For individuals who die on or after January 1, 2017, no
                                                              claim will be made for their predeceased spouse.

                                                     (2) With respect to liens on the home of any individual who the
                                                         State determines is permanently residing in an institution and
                                                         who must as a condition of receiving services in the institution
                                                         apply their income to the cost of care, the State will not seek
                                                         adjustment or recovery of medical assistance correctly paid on
                                                         behalf of the individual until such time as none of the following
                                                         individuals are residing in the individual's home:

                                                          (a) a sibling of the individual (who was residing in the
                                                              individual's home for at least one year immediately
                                                              before the date the individual was institutionalized), or

                                                          (b) a child of the individual (who was residing in the
                                                              individual's home for at least two years immediately
                                                              before the date that the individual was institutionalized)
                                                              who establishes to the satisfaction of the State that the
                                                              care the child provided permitted the individual to reside
                                                              at home rather than become institutionalized.

                                                     (3) No money payments under another program are reduced as a
                                                         means of adjusting or recovering Medicaid claims incorrectly
                                                         paid.




TN No.: 16-030
Supersedes                    Approval Date: March 24, 2017        Effective Date: January 1, 2017
TN No.: 94-031
                                                                                                                         Attachment 4.17-A
                                                                                                                         Page 1
                                              STATE PLAN UNDER TITLE XIX OF THE SOCIAL SECURITY ACT

                                                               State/Territory: California
1. The State uses the following process for determining that individual who is residing in an institution cannot
reasonably be expected to be discharged from the medical institution and return home:

   The beneficiary or his or her representative declare that the beneficiary residing in an institution cannot
   reasonably be expected to be discharged and return home. The beneficiary has been given a 30-day notice of the
   Department of Health Services' intent to impose a lien and has an opportunity for a hearing in accordance with
   state established hearing procedures. The notice to the beneficiary must include an explanation of the proposed
   lien and the effect on an individual's ownership interest.

2. The following criteria are used for establishing that an individual permanently residing in an institution’s son or
   daughter provided care as specified under regulations at 42 CFR §433.36(f):

   A son or daughter of the individual residing in the home, who has resided there for at least two years immediately
   before the date of the individual's admission to the institution, has resided there on a continuous basis since that
   time, and can establish to the agency's satisfaction that he or she has been providing care which permitted the
   individual to reside at home rather than in an institution. (A statement from a licensed health care provider(s)
   clearly indicating that the level and duration of care provided prevented or delayed the decedent from being
   placed in a medical or long-term care institution will satisfy this provision.)

3. The State defines the terms below as follows:

   • estate- For individuals who die on or after January 1, 2017, “estate” is defined as all real and personal property
     and other assets in the individual’s probate estate that are required to be subject to a claim for recovery
     pursuant to Section 1396p(d)(4)(a) of Title 42 of the United States Code. For individuals who die on or after
     October 1, 1993 and prior to January 1, 2017, and for payments made on or after October 1, 1993, "estate” is
     defined as a real and personal property and other assets in which the decedent had any legal title or interest
     at the time of death (to the extent of such interest), including assets conveyed to a dependent, heir, survivor,
     or assignee of the decedent through joint tenancy, tenancy in common, survivorship, life estate, living trust,
     annuities purchased on or after September 1, 2004, life insurance policy that names the estate as the
     beneficiary or reverts to the estate, or any retirement account that names the estate as the beneficiary or
     reverts to the estate.

   • individual's home - An individual's principal domicile.

   • equity interest in the home - The fair market value of the property to which the decedent held legal title or
     interest at the time of death (to the extent of such interest), less the amount owed in deeds of trust,
     mortgages, and liens on record at the time of death.

   • residing in the home for at least one or two years on a continuous basis - To live in the beneficiary's principal
     domicile, for an extended or prolonged period and without interruption or cessation, for one year in the case
     of a sibling and two years for a son or daughter.

   • discharge from the medical institution and return home - To leave a medical facility and return to the
     individual's principal residence.
      lawfully residing - To live in a place for an extended
      or permanent period of time with the authorization of
TN No.: 16-030
      the owner(s), and within the bounds of law or public
      policy.
Supersedes                                         Approval Date: March 24, 2017             Effective Date: January 1, 2016
TN No.: 06-011
                                                                                                       Attachment 4.17-A
                                                                                                       Page 2
                              STATE PLAN UNDER TITLE XIX OF THE SOCIAL SECURITY ACT

                                              State/Territory: California
   • lawfully residing - To live in a place for an extended or permanent period of time with the authorization of the
     owner(s), and within the bounds of law or public policy.

4. The state defines substantial hardship as follows: A. An applicant can demonstrate through submission of a
   written application or, if applicable, at an estate hearing, that enforcement of the of the Department's claim
   would result in a substantial hardship to the applicant based on the factors listed below. B. A substantial hardship
   does not exist when the decedent or applicant created the hardship by using estate planning methods to divert or
   shelter assets in order to avoid estate recovery. C. To the extent that there currently is, or later becomes any
   conflict between the following criteria and the standards that may be specified by the Secretary of the
   Department of Health and Human Services, the federal standards shall prevail.

   The following standards and procedures are used by the State for waiving estate recoveries when recovery would
   cause a substantial hardship.

   In determining the existence of a substantial hardship, the Department shall waive an applicant’s proportionate
   share of the claim if one of more of the following factors apply:

       •   When allowing the applicant to receive the inheritance from the estate would enable the applicant
           to discontinue eligibility for public assistance payments and/or medical assistance programs; or,


       •   When an aged, blind, or disabled applicant has continuously lived in the decedent's home for at least one
           year prior to the decedent's death and continues to reside there, and is unable to obtain financing to
           repay the State. The applicant shall apply to obtain financing, for an amount not to exceed his or her
           proportionate share of the claim, from a financial institution as defined in Probate Code Section 40. The
           applicant shall provide the Department with a denial letter(s) from the financial institution; or,

       •   When the applicant provided care to the decedent for two or more years that prevented or delayed the
           decedent's admission to a medical or long-term care institution. The applicant must have resided in the
           decedent's home during the period care was provided and continue to reside in the decedent's home.
           The applicant must provide written medical substantiation from a licensed health care provider(s), which
           clearly indicates that the level and duration of care provided prevented or delayed the decedent from
           being placed in a medical or long-term care institution; or,

       •   When the applicant transferred the property to the decedent for no consideration; or,

       •   When equity in the real property is needed by the applicant to make the property habitable; or,

       •   When equity in the real property is needed to acquire the necessities of life, such as food, clothing,
           shelter or medical care.




TN No.: 16-030
Supersedes                        Approval Date: March 24, 2017             Effective Date: January 1, 2017
TN No.: 06-011
                                                                                                         Attachment 4.17-A
                                                                                                        Page 2a
                               STATE PLAN UNDER TITLE XIX OF THE SOCIAL SECURITY ACT

                                               State/Territory: California


Additionally, the Department shall waive its collection on an estate property, if one or more of the following factors
applies:

     •    When the estate property is part of an income-producing business, including a working farm or ranch, and
          recovery of medical assistance expenditures would result in the applicant losing his or her primary source
          of income; or,

     •    When the estate is a homestead of modest value and the deceased individual against whose estate the claim
          exists, died on or after January 1, 2017. A homestead of modest value is defined as a home whose fair market
          value is 50 percent or less of the median price of homes in the county where the homestead is located, as of
          the date of the decedent’s death. If a decedent owns multiple homes, this waiver shall only be granted for the
          decedent’s principal residence.

The Department will waive its claim in its entirety:

    •    When the decedent is survived by a registered domestic partner.




TN No.: 16-030
Supersedes                         Approval Date: March 24, 2017             Effective Date: January 1, 2017
TN No.: N/A
                                                                                                                                                             Attachment 4.17-A
                                                                                                                                                             Page 3
                                            STATE PLAN UNDER TITLE XIX OF THE SOCIAL SECURITY ACT

                                                                      State/Territory: California
      The Department shall provide written notification to the applicant of its decision regarding the hardship
      waiver application within 90 days of the applicant's submission. If an application for hardship waiver is denied,
      the Department shall provide the applicant with notice of the right, the address, and the timeframe to request
      an estate hearing, at the time it provides notice of its decision. The Department shall issue its decision on an
      applicant's hardship waiver application prior to and independent of its consideration of a voluntary post death
      lien.

      If it is determined that enforcement of the State's claim would result in a substantial hardship to one or more
      of the dependents, heirs, or survivors of the individual against whose estate the claim exists, the Department
      shall waive the proportionate share of its claim against any applicant who qualifies for a waiver due to a
      substantial hardship, as specified in Section 50963(a). The Department shall not enforce collection of the
      proportionate share of an estate claim for any applicant who is awaiting the resolution of a hardship waiver
      request or an estate hearing. However, the Department shall enforce collection of its claim from the remaining
      dependent(s), heir(s), or survivor(s) for his or her proportionate share of the claim.


5. The State defines cost-effective as follows (include methodology/thresholds used to determine cost
   effectiveness):

   Because of the volume of cases and limited availability of resources, the Department has determined that it is not
   cost-effective to pursue continued collection or litigation after a claim/lien is filed if the potential net collection
   amount is under $5,000. However, when the administrative costs to process a case and continue recovery are
   very low, usually with cases handled by public administrators/guardians and formal probates, the Department
   may file and pursue continued collection or litigation for any amount. Additionally, in certain circumstances when
   the debtor has excessive allowable expenses or obligations or when the heir(s) lives out of state and is not
   responsive to collection efforts, etc., the Department may determine that it is not cost-effective to litigate or
   otherwise pursue recoveries, even though the net assets are over the normal $5,000 threshold.

6. The State uses the following collection procedures (include specific elements contained in the advance notice
   requirement, the method for applying for a waiver, hearing and appeals procedures, and time frames involved):

   A. Advance Notice Procedure

       Beneficiaries are notified of the Medi-Cal Estate Recovery program, during their initial application process
      Beneficiaries are notified of the Medi-Cal Estate Recovery program, during their initial application process and during annual redetermination, via the Rights and
      Responsibilities form (MC219), Statement of Facts (MC210), or other forms, which they read and sign. Our program also sends beneficiaries notices annually, informing
       and during annual redetermination, via the Rights and Responsibilities form (MC219), Statement of Facts
      them of the program, including any updates or changes in laws/procedures affecting estate recoveries. In addition, the Department publishes a Medi-Cal Pamphlet and

       (MC210), or other forms, which they read and sign. Our program also sends beneficiaries notices annually,
      places the form on the Department’s webpage which explains the circumstances Medi-Cal may bill the estate of a deceased beneficiary. Heirs, or their representatives, are
      notified any time the Department intends to claim against a deceased beneficiary's estate or place a lien against a beneficiary residing in an institution’s real property (if
       informing them of the program, including any updates or changes in laws/procedures affecting estate
      beneficiary or personal representative has indicated no intent to return home), are informed of our legal authority to do so, and are given the opportunity to apply for a
      hardship waiver or otherwise appeal our decision.
       recoveries. In addition, the Department publishes a Medi-Cal Pamphlet and places the form




TN No.: 16-030
Supersedes                                        Approval Date: March 24, 2017                                 Effective Date: January 1, 2017
TN No.: 14-030
                                                                                                         Attachment 4.17-A
                                                                                                         Page 4
                              STATE PLAN UNDER TITLE XIX OF THE SOCIAL SECURITY ACT

                                               State/Territory: California
      on the Department’s webpage which explains the circumstances Medi-Cal may bill the estate of a deceased
      beneficiary. Heirs, or their representatives, are notified any time the Department intends to claim against a
      deceased beneficiary's estate or place a lien against a beneficiary residing in an institution’s real property (if
      beneficiary or personal representative has indicated no intent to return home), are informed of our legal
      authority to do so, and are given the opportunity to apply for a hardship waiver or otherwise appeal our
      decision.

  B. Collection Procedures

      The Department may be notified of a Medi-Cal beneficiary's death in several different ways. California
      Probate Code Sections 215, 9202, and 19202 require the estate attorney or personal representative of a
      deceased Medi-Cal beneficiary to notify the Department within 90 days of the date of death. Notice must be
      provided in writing to the Director of the Department of Health Services at his or her Sacramento office, or,
      Estate Recovery Unit, Mail Stop 4720, P.O. Box 997425, Sacramento, CA 95899-7425 or submit notice
      electronically through the Department’s website at dhcs.ca.gov/ER. The Department also receives referrals of
      the death of a person who may have been receiving Medi-Cal benefits from various other private and public
      sources. The Department also completes a monthly data search of the Medi-Cal Eligibility System to check the
      eligibility status codes on each Medi-Cal beneficiary's file. If the eligibility status shows that the beneficiary
      was terminated by reason of death, a system generated questionnaire may be sent to the estate, at the last
      known address.

      When notice of a Medi-Cal client's death is received by the Department, research is necessary to verify the
      Medi-Cal eligibility periods, the beneficiary's assets at the time of death, and that the case meets the criteria
      of law to pursue recovery. Cases which pass this screening are established on the program's Automated
      Collection Management System (ACMS), claim details are requested and an itemized list of payments to
      providers, health plans, etc., is prepared. This itemization is used to file a claim in formal probate with the
      county court and/or with the person responsible for the decedent's estate.

      Once a case is established, and accounts receivable (AR) entered into the ACMS, cases are monitored
      quarterly. Status requests may be sent to the responsible party(ies) and case notes track the progress of the
      claim. Payments received are deposited daily and the ACMS AR adjusted (making sure that the correct
      amount was paid). Failure of payments to be made, claims honored, attorneys (or other responsible party)
      cooperating in closing probate, etc., may result in collection action against the heir(s), attorney, or other
      responsible persons, by litigating in small claims court, or referring to the Attorney General's Office for filing a
      complaint with the courts.

  C. Collection Procedures -Voluntary Post Death Liens

      Voluntary post death liens may be utilized to secure and satisfy the Department's claim when one or more of
      the dependents, heirs, or survivors of the deceased Medi-Cal client are living in and not willing to sell the real
      property, are unable to pay the State's claim in full, and can demonstrate that they are unable to obtain
      financing to pay off the claim. A voluntary post death lien is only utilized as a means to secure the
      Department's claim and is voluntary in nature.


TN No.: 16-030
Supersedes                       Approval Date: March 24, 2017               Effective Date: January 1, 2017
TN No.: 06-011
                                                                                                                                                Attachment 4.17-A
                                                                                                                                                Page 5
                                     STATE PLAN UNDER TITLE XIX OF THE SOCIAL SECURITY ACT

                                                           State/Territory: California

      If a hardship waiver has been requested, a decision will be issued on the waiver request prior to and independent of
      the Department introducing a voluntary post death lien.

      Once it has been determined that one or more of the dependent(s), heir(s), or survivor(s) are unable to pay or obtain
      financing to pay their proportionate share of the estate claim, the Department may offer to accept a voluntary post
      death lien. The dependent(s), heir(s), or survivor(s) must provide the Department with a letter(s) from a financial
      institution defined in Probate Code Section 40, which denies financing for an amount not to exceed the dependent(s),
      heir(s), or survivor(s) proportionate share of the claim.

      The Department may request monthly payments, based on the dependent(s), heir(s), or survivor(s) financial ability to
      pay, in addition to the placement of a lien on the estate property. These payments would be based on the
      dependent(s), heir(s), or survivor(s) financial ability to pay, and be adjusted as needed. Monthly payments would
      continue until the lien amount owed to the Department by the lienee, plus interest, is paid in full.

      For estate claims where the individual dies prior to January 1, 2017 the lien will accrue simple interest at the rate of
      seven percent per annum. For estate claims where the individual dies on or after January 1, 2017, the lien will accrue
      at the rate equal to the annual average rate earned on investments in the Surplus Money Investment Fund in the
      calendar year preceding the year in which the decedent died, or simple interest at 7 percent per annum, whichever is
      lower. Liens becomes due and payable, including all interest accrued, upon: 1) the death of the dependent(s), heir(s),
      or survivor(s): or 2) the sale, refinance, transfer, or change in title to the real property; or 3) escrow funding: and/or 4)
      default in payments.

      In the event of a transfer of an interest in, or title to, real property subject to the voluntary post death lien without
      payment of the lien, the lienee shall provide notification of the transfer, with the identity and address of the new
      titleholder(s), by mail to the Department, within 30 days of the transfer. The lienee shall notify the new titleholder(s)
      of the voluntary post death lien prior to the transfer of title, and the obligation to satisfy the lien. The new titleholder
      must make arrangements for full satisfaction of the Department's lien with the Estate Recovery Program.

      When the dependent(s), heir(s), or survivor(s) agree to a voluntary post death lien, the Department will prepare and
      mail the lien documents to the dependent(s), heir(s), or survivor(s) for notarized signature(s). Once the lien documents
      are returned to the Department, the Department forwards the documents on to the County Recorder's Office where
      the property is located for recording of the lien. The Department will issue a release of lien to the County Recorder's
      Office after full payment of the lien with accrued interest is received.

  D. Collection Procedures - Imposing liens Against the Real Property of Beneficiaries who are Residing in an Institution

      Atthe
     At   thetime
               time of of
                        their  initial
                            their      application
                                    initial            for Medi-Cal
                                             application              benefits
                                                             for Medi-Cal    benefits     and their
                                                                                 and during     duringannual
                                                                                                         theirredetermination
                                                                                                                annual redetermination            process, who are
                                                                                                                                      process, individuals
     residing   in an   institution    who    own   real property   are  asked   if they  intend  to return   home
      individuals who are residing in an institution who own real property are asked if they intend to return home   to  live  in  that real property   at any  timein
                                                                                                                                                             to live  in
     the  future.  If the   beneficiary    or   personal    representative   indicates    no  intent to  return  home    (and
      that real property at any time in the future. If the beneficiary or personal representative indicates no intent to return  if there is no spouse     or dependent
     relative
      home (andresiding     in theishome),
                       if there       no spousethe County     Department
                                                      or dependent          of Social
                                                                        relative         Services
                                                                                    residing        may
                                                                                               in the      send a
                                                                                                       home),    theNotice
                                                                                                                       County of Action   (NOA) tofthe
                                                                                                                                    Department             beneficiary
                                                                                                                                                       Social  Services
     residing
      may send  in an   institution.
                     a Notice          The NOA
                                  of Action          informs
                                                 (NOA)         beneficiaries
                                                          to the  beneficiary  that  if the property
                                                                                  residing             is listed forThe
                                                                                              in an institution.      saleNOA                  eligibility is that if
                                                                                                                                     Medi-Calbeneficiaries
                                                                                                                             (andinforms
     established
      the property   or continues),
                          is listed forasalelien (and
                                                  will beMedi-Cal
                                                           recordedeligibility
                                                                      against the    property to cover
                                                                                  is established            the cost of amedical
                                                                                                     or continues),         lien willcare  received under
                                                                                                                                        be recorded           thethe
                                                                                                                                                        against
     Medi-Cal    program.       The   notice   also   advises   the clients of  their  right to request    further  county
      property to cover the cost of medical care received under the Medi-Cal program. The notice also advises the clients     review    and/or a  state  hearing,  within
                                                                                                                                                                      of
     30  days   of the   date   of  the  notice,
      their right to request further county review in order   to present  additional    information/evidence       for consideration.      No  action  is taken   during
     this 30-day period or pending further review and/or a hearing.



TN No.: 16-030
Supersedes                                Approval Date: March 24, 2017                       Effective Date: January 1, 2017
TN No.: 06-011
                                                                                                       Attachment 4.17-A
                                                                                                       Page 6
                             STATE PLAN UNDER TITLE XIX OF THE SOCIAL SECURITY ACT

                                             State/Territory: California
      and/or a state hearing, within 30 days of the date of the notice, in order to present additional
      information/evidence for consideration. No action is taken during this 30-day period or pending further
      review and/or a hearing.

      If, after the 30 days has elapsed, the Department will research the referral from the county to determine if
      the case meets the criteria of law to impose a lien against the property. That is, there is no surviving spouse,
      child under age 21, blind or disabled child, or a sibling with an interest in the home, living in the home. Cases
      that pass this screening are established on the program's ACMS, claims details are requested, and an itemized
      list of payments made thus far to providers, health plans, etc., is prepared to determine the preliminary
      amount of the lien. The Department then sends a lien to the appropriate county recorder's office and a copy
      to the beneficiary. The transmittal letter, which accompanies the beneficiary's copy of the lien, gives the
      preliminary amount of the lien, informs that the lien amount may increase monthly (as services are paid), and
      provides the name of the person to contact if an escrow is ready to close or a sale is finalized for the final
      balance due.

      Once a case is established and an accounts receivable is entered onto ACMS, cases are monitored quarterly.
      Status requests may be sent to the beneficiary and case notes track the progress of the pending sale/lien. If at
      any time prior to the sale of the property, the Medi-Cal beneficiary is discharged from the medical institution
      and resumes use of the property as principal residence, the lien is removed. If and when the property is sold,
      the amount of the lien will be recovered from the proceeds of the sale.

  E. Procedures for Waiver of a Claim Based Upon Substantial Hardship

      California law and regulations require the Department to waive a dependent(s), heir(s), or survivor(s)
      (applicant) proportionate share of its claim against the estate of a deceased Medi-Cal beneficiary, when the
      Department determines that enforcement of the Department's claim would result in a substantial hardship to
      the applicant. The Department provides written notice informing the person handling the decedent's estate
      of the right to seek a waiver of or to contest the Department's claim. The notice and attachments include the
      basis for the estate claim; the specific statutes and regulations supporting the claim; the right to seek a
      waiver of the Department's claim; the right to contest the Department's claim; the right to request an estate
      hearing if dissatisfied with the waiver decision; the timeframes for requesting a waiver or estate hearing; and
      the basis for the applicant to seek a waiver or estate hearing due to substantial hardship. The Department
      shall attach to the notice a copy of the itemized Medi-Cal payments that constitute the basis for the claim. In
      addition, the Department shall provide an Application for Hardship Waiver, form DHCS 6195. The person
      handling the estate of the decedent shall notify all dependents, heirs, or survivors of the Department's claim
      and their right to seek a waiver of or to contest the Department's claim against the estate. An applicant has
      60 days from the date stated on the Department's notice in which to submit an application for waiver due to
      substantial hardship.

      The actual criteria used in determining substantial hardship are listed in (4) above. An applicant may
      challenge the Department's hardship waiver decision by submitting a written request for an estate hearing to
      the Director of the department through his or her designee, the Office of Administrative Hearings and
      Appeals, within 60 days of the date of the Department's decision


TN No.: 06-030
Supersedes                       Approval Date: March 24, 2017             Effective Date: January 1, 2017
TN No.: 06-011

