Source URL: https://sjud.senate.ca.gov/sites/sjud.senate.ca.gov/files/sb_1305_roth_senate_judiciary_committee_analysis.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-09-23

                         SENATE JUDICIARY COMMITTEE
                         Senator Hannah-Beth Jackson, Chair
                             2019-2020 Regular Session


SB 1305 (Roth)
Version: May 13, 2020
Hearing Date: May 22, 2020
Fiscal: No
Urgency: No
JT


                                        SUBJECT

                           Revocable transfer on death deeds

                                        DIGEST

This bill would extend the sunset date for revocable transfer on death deeds (RTODD)
from January 1, 2021 to January 1, 2022.

                               EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

An RTODD is a deed of real property that designates a beneficiary to receive the
property when the transferor dies. An RTODD enables a homeowner to deed the
property directly to a desired beneficiary without the expense of a trust or a probate
proceeding.

Following the California Law Revision Commission’s (Commission) recommendation
to adopt legislation providing for RTODDs and a few failed attempts at legislation, the
Legislature passed AB 139 (Gatto, Ch. 293, Stats. 2015) as a five-year pilot program, set
to expire January 1, 2021, with a requirement that the Commission study the effect of
RTODDs and make recommendations for the reform of the law based on its findings.
The Commission has completed its study and issued tentative recommendations.

However, because legislative efforts have been concentrated on addressing the COVID-
19 pandemic, there has not been a sufficient opportunity to fully consider these
recommendations. This bill would extend the sunset date for RTODDs from January 1,
2021 to January 1, 2022, so that the Legislature may vet these issues next session. The
bill has no support or opposition.
SB 1305 (Roth)
Page 2 of 5

                             PROPOSED CHANGES TO THE LAW

Existing law:

    1) Authorizes, until January 1, 2021, the use of an RTODD to transfer real property
       with four or fewer residential dwelling units, a condominium unit, or a single
       tract of agricultural real estate consisting of 40 acres or less with a single-family
       residence. (Prob. Code §§ 5600(c) & 5610.)1

    2) Defines an RTODD as an instrument that does all of the following:
          a. makes a donative transfer of real property to a named beneficiary;
          b. operates on the transferor’s death; and
          c. remains revocable until the transferor’s death. (§ 5614(a).)

    3) Provides that an owner who has the capacity to contract may make an RTODD,
       which must identify the beneficiary by name, be signed by the transferor, and
       duly notarized. (§§ 5620, 5622 & 5624.)

    4) Sets forth requirements for execution, revocation, implementation, and
       challenging the validity of RTODD. (§§ 5620, 5630, 5650, 5690.)

This bill extends the sunset date for RTODDs from January 1, 2021 to January 1, 2022.

                                              COMMENTS

1. Background

In 2006, the Commission issued a study that recommended the adoption of legislation
enabling the use of RTODDs in California.2 At the time, nine other states statutorily
recognized these instruments for conveying real property without using a trust or going
through a probate proceeding. The Commission found that, while these instruments
were relatively novel and data on their effectiveness was scant, practitioners generally
responded positively to these instruments. The Commission concluded that the benefits
of a low-cost, efficient method of conveying real property outweighed concerns about
the potential for fraud and abuse.

The Commission concluded as follows:

        The nonprobate revolution has largely bypassed real property. Nearly all other
        significant assets, including life insurance, securities, bank accounts, and pension


1 All further statutory references are to the Probate Code.
2 CLRC, Recommendation: Revocable Transfer On Death (TOD) Deed (Oct. 2006) 36 Cal. L. Rev. Comm’n

Repts, available at http://clrc.ca.gov/pub/Printed-Reports/Pub241-L3032.1.pdf (as of May 17, 2020).
SB 1305 (Roth)
Page 3 of 5

         plans, pass commonly by beneficiary designation outside the probate system.
         Real property is the last major holdout, although substantial amounts of real
         property pass by right of survivorship under joint tenancy or community
         property or under a trust. It has been observed that ownership of real property is
         the factor most likely to determine whether a death will lead to a probate
         proceeding.

         California law does not adequately deal with the many types of nonprobate
         transfer and their consequences. Comprehensive treatment of the area is
         necessary, much as Missouri has done with its nonprobate transfer law and as
         the Uniform Probate Code has done with creditor rights issues. But the need for
         comprehensive treatment of nonprobate transfer law should not be cause for
         delay in considering the concept of the revocable TOD deed on its merits.

         Having surveyed existing transfer devices and reviewed the experience in other
         jurisdictions, and having considered the legal incidents of the revocable TOD
         deed, the Law Revision Commission recommends adoption of the device in
         California […].3

2. The Commission’s study

AB 139 (Gatto, Stats. 2015, Ch. 293), which authorized the use of RTODDs, directed the
Commission to conduct a study based on a series of questions. (Id. at § 21.) The
Commission recently issued the study,4 which drew the following conclusions:

        With minor exceptions, there are no problems with the RTODD statute and it
         should be continued for another 10 years, with the Commission directed to
         conduct a second follow-up study before the end of that period.
        The RTODD does not appear to be subject to misuse or misunderstanding, as it is
         more straightforward and limited than other property transfer instruments, such
         as grant deeds.
        To improve the RTODD statute, the Legislature should make the following
         changes:
             1. Require an RTODD to be witnessed under rules similar to those governing
                wills.5 Specifically, require that:
                    The deed be signed by two witnesses who were both present when
                        the RTODD was signed or acknowledged by the transferor.
                    If a beneficiary of an RTODD also signs as a witness, the RTODD
                        would be presumed to be the product of fraud or undue influence.


3 Id. at pp. 211-212.
4 Revocable Transfer on Death Deed: Follow-Up Study (Nov. 2019) 46 Cal. L. Rev. Comm’n Repts. 135,

available at http://clrc.ca.gov/pub/Printed-Reports/Pub241-L3032.1.pdf (as of May 17, 2019).
5 See §§ 6110, 6112; Evid. Code § 870.
SB 1305 (Roth)
Page 4 of 5

                    Witnesses be eligible to provide evidence in an action to contest the
                     validity of the RTODD.
         2. Require that an RTODD beneficiary give notice to the transferor’s heirs
             when the transferor dies.
         3. Clarify that a beneficiary’s personal liability for a deceased transferor’s
             unsecured debts includes liability for the transferor’s funeral expenses,
             expenses of last illness, and wage claims.
         4. Replace existing section 5676, which authorizes the return of transferred
             property to a deceased transferor’s estate for use in paying unsecured
             debts with a provision that instead makes the beneficiary personally liable
             to the estate for a calculated share of those debts, based on the existing
             rules of abatement.
         5. Extend the time to record and thereby preserve the effect of third party
             interests in property transferred by an RTODD.
         6. Clarify that an error or ambiguity in an RTODD does not invalidate the
             RTODD, if a court can determine the transferor’s intent by applying the
             general law on judicial construction of deeds.
         7. Expressly allow a court to apply cy pres principles to reform a charitable
             RTODD that would otherwise fail because the named beneficiary
             disclaims the gift or does not exist at the time the RTODD operates.
         8. Clarify that an enforceable restriction on the use of property transferred
             by RTODD does not impair the transfer of title; the beneficiary takes title
             subject to the restriction.
         9. Make clear that the beneficiary of a revoked RTODD has standing to
             contest the validity of the revocation, but only after the transferor’s death.
         10. Add guidance to the “Common Questions” document to address the
             effect of an RTODD on a mobilehome.
         11. Make a variety of technical and minor substantive changes to improve the
             clarity and operation of the law.

The introduced version of this bill incorporated these recommended changes. However,
legislative efforts have been redirected towards addressing the COVID-19 pandemic. By
extending the sunset of the RTODD by one year, this bill would enable Legislature to
contemplate these recommendations next session. The author writes:

      SB 1305 ensures that the [RTODD] process is not repealed before an adequate
      exploration of the California Law Revision Commission ‘s recommendations can
      be discussed in the legislature-a conversation which must be postponed due to
      the impact of COVID-19. This bill will allow RTODDs, a useful and accessible
      tool for many Californians, to continue for an additional year and give the
      legislature more time to discuss how to best improve them.
SB 1305 (Roth)
Page 5 of 5

                                      SUPPORT

None

                                    OPPOSITION

None

                              RELATED LEGISLATION

Pending Legislation: None known

Prior Legislation:

AB 1739 (Chau, Ch. 65, Stats. 2018) clarified that the “Common Questions” language in
the statutory form for an RTODD need not be recorded along with the deed portion of
the form.

AB 3004 (Kiley, 2018) would have made various changes to the statutory provisions
governing RTODD. It was held in the Assembly Judiciary Committee.

AB 139 (Gatto, Ch. 293, Stats. 2015) established a five-year pilot program for RTODD.
                                     **************

