Source URL: https://california.public.law/codes/probate_code_section_5678
Retrieved: 2026-09-23

California Probate Code section 5678 (2025) 

California.Public.Law

 California Codes 

 Remove ads 

 Login 

 Codes 

 Probate Code 

 Div. 5 

 Part 4 

 Chap. 3 

 Creditors 

 § 5678

Probate Code section 5678

 (a)
If proceedings for the administration of the transferor’s estate are commenced, a beneficiary who receives property from the transferor under a revocable transfer on death deed may voluntarily return that property to the transferor’s estate for administration. 
 (b)
Property returned to the transferor’s estate under this section shall be treated as if it had been specifically devised to the beneficiary by the transferor. 
 (c)
If the beneficiary’s action or inaction increased the value of property returned to the estate or decreased the estate’s obligations, the estate shall reimburse the beneficiary by the same amount. Actions or inaction that increase the value of returned property or decrease the estate’s obligations include, but are not necessarily limited to, the following actions: 
 (1)
A payment toward an unsecured debt of the decedent. 
 (2)
A payment toward a debt secured against the returned property. 
 (3)
A significant improvement of the returned property that increased the fair market value of the property. 
 (d)
If the beneficiary’s action or inaction decreased the value of property returned to the estate or increased the estate’s obligations, the beneficiary is personally liable to the estate for that amount. Actions or inaction that decrease the value of the returned property or increase the estate’s obligations include, but are not necessarily limited to, the following actions or inaction: 
 (1)
An action or inaction that resulted in a lien or encumbrance being recorded against the property. 
 (2)
The receipt of income from the property, if that income would have accrued to the estate had the property not been transferred to the beneficiary. 
 (e)
The personal representative shall provide the beneficiary a written statement of any reimbursement or liability under this section, along with a statement of the reasons for the reimbursement or liability. For the purposes of Section 11420 , any reimbursement under this section shall be deemed an expense of administration. 
 (f)
In the event that the beneficiary and the personal representative cannot agree on the reimbursement or liability due under this section, the beneficiary or personal representative may petition the court for an order determining the amount of the reimbursement or liability. In making a decision under this subdivision, the court should consider the surrounding circumstances, including whether the parties acted in good faith and whether a particular result would impose an unfair burden on the beneficiary or the estate. 

 Source: 
 Section 5678 , https://leginfo.­legislature.­ca.­gov/faces/codes_displaySection.­xhtml?lawCode=PROB§ionNum=5678.­ (updated Jan. 1, 2022; accessed Sep. 21, 2026).

 5670

 5672

 5674

 5677

 5678

Up to date

 Verified: 

Sep. 21, 2026

§ 5678's source at
 ca​.gov 

 Stay Connected

Join thousands of people who receive monthly site updates.

 Subscribe 

 Get Legal Help

The State Bar of California runs a service for finding
an attorney in good standing. Initial consultations
are usually free or discounted: Certified Lawyer Referral Services Directory 

 Committed to Public Service

We will always provide free access to the current law. In addition,
 we provide special support 
for non-profit, educational, and government users. Through social
entre­pre­neurship, we’re lowering the cost of legal services and
increasing citizen access.

 Navigate

 Find a Lawyer 

 Blog 

 About Us 

 API 

 Contact Us 

 Reports 

 Secondary Sources 

 Privacy Policy 

 California: 
 Codes 

 Colorado: 
 C.R.S. 

 Florida: 
 Statutes 

 Nevada: 
 NRS 

 New York: 
 Laws 

 Oregon: 
 OAR , ORS 

 Texas: 
 Statutes 

 World: 
 Rome Statute , International Dictionary 

 Location: 
 https://california.public.law/codes/probate_code_section_5678 

 Original Source: 
 Section 5678 ,
 https://leginfo.­legislature.­ca.­gov/faces/codes_displaySection.­xhtml?lawCode=PROB§ionNum=5678.­ 
(last ac­cessed May 12, 2025).

 Blank Outline Levels

 × 

 The legislature occasionally skips outline levels.
 For example:

 (3) A person may apply [...]
(4)(a) A person petitioning for relief [...] 

 In this example, (3) , (4) ,
 and (4)(a) are all outline levels, but 
 (4) was
 omitted by its authors. It's only implied. This presents an
 interesting challenge when laying out the text. We've
 decided to display a blank section with this note, in order
 to aide readability.

 Trust but verify. 

 Here is the original source for section 5678 

 Do you have an opinion about this solution?
 Drop us a line. 

 Close
