Source URL: https://california.public.law/codes/probate_code_section_5652
Retrieved: 2026-09-23

California Probate Code section 5652 (2025) 

California.Public.Law

 California Codes 

 Remove ads 

 Login 

 Codes 

 Probate Code 

 Div. 5 

 Part 4 

 Chap. 3 

 Gen. Provisions 

 § 5652

Probate Code section 5652

 (a)
A revocable transfer on death deed transfers all of the transferor’s interest in the property on the transferor’s death according to the following rules: 
 (1)
Subject to the beneficiary’s right to disclaim the transfer, the interest in the property is transferred to the beneficiary in accordance with the deed. 
 (2)
The interest of a beneficiary is contingent on the beneficiary surviving the transferor. Notwithstanding Section 21110 , the interest of a beneficiary that fails to survive the transferor lapses. 
 (3)
Except as provided in paragraph (4), if there is more than one beneficiary, they take the property as tenants in common, in equal shares. 
 (4)
If there is more than one beneficiary, the share of a beneficiary that lapses or fails for any reason is transferred to the others in equal shares. 
 (b)
Property is transferred by a revocable transfer on death deed subject to any limitation on the transferor’s interest that is of record at the transferor’s death or that is recorded no later than 120 days after the affidavit required by subdivision (c) of Section 5682 is recorded, including, but not limited to, a lien, encumbrance, easement, lease, or other instrument affecting the transferor’s interest, whether recorded before or after recordation of the revocable transfer on death deed. The holder of rights under that instrument may enforce those rights against the property notwithstanding its transfer by the revocable transfer on death deed. An enforceable restriction on the use of the transferred property does not affect the transfer of title to the property by a revocable transfer on death deed. 
 (c)
Notwithstanding subdivision (b), an interest in a stock cooperative is transferred by a revocable transfer on death deed subject to any limitation on the transferor’s interest that is expressed in the governing documents of the stock cooperative or in a written agreement between the stock cooperative and the transferor, without regard for whether or not those instruments are recorded. 
 (d)
If a stock cooperative exercises an option to purchase property transferred by a revocable transfer on death deed on the transferor’s death, the result is as follows: 
 (1)
The property is transferred to the stock cooperative rather than the beneficiary. 
 (2)
The purchase price is paid to the beneficiary. Unless the law or the governing documents of the stock cooperative provide otherwise, the purchase price is the fair market value of the property, less the amount of any liens or encumbrances on the property at the time of the owner’s death and less any amount that the decedent owed to the stock cooperative. 
 (e)
A revocable transfer on death deed transfers the property without covenant or warranty of title. 

 Source: 
 Section 5652 , https://leginfo.­legislature.­ca.­gov/faces/codes_displaySection.­xhtml?lawCode=PROB§ionNum=5652.­ (updated Jan. 1, 2024; accessed Sep. 21, 2026).

 5650

 5652

 5654

 5656

 5658

 5659

Up to date

 Verified: 

Sep. 21, 2026

§ 5652's source at
 ca​.gov 

 Stay Connected

Join thousands of people who receive monthly site updates.

 Subscribe 

 Get Legal Help

The State Bar of California runs a service for finding
an attorney in good standing. Initial consultations
are usually free or discounted: Certified Lawyer Referral Services Directory 

 Committed to Public Service

We will always provide free access to the current law. In addition,
 we provide special support 
for non-profit, educational, and government users. Through social
entre­pre­neurship, we’re lowering the cost of legal services and
increasing citizen access.

 Navigate

 Find a Lawyer 

 Blog 

 About Us 

 API 

 Contact Us 

 Reports 

 Secondary Sources 

 Privacy Policy 

 California: 
 Codes 

 Colorado: 
 C.R.S. 

 Florida: 
 Statutes 

 Nevada: 
 NRS 

 New York: 
 Laws 

 Oregon: 
 OAR , ORS 

 Texas: 
 Statutes 

 World: 
 Rome Statute , International Dictionary 

 Location: 
 https://california.public.law/codes/probate_code_section_5652 

 Original Source: 
 Section 5652 ,
 https://leginfo.­legislature.­ca.­gov/faces/codes_displaySection.­xhtml?lawCode=PROB§ionNum=5652.­ 
(last ac­cessed May 12, 2025).

 Blank Outline Levels

 × 

 The legislature occasionally skips outline levels.
 For example:

 (3) A person may apply [...]
(4)(a) A person petitioning for relief [...] 

 In this example, (3) , (4) ,
 and (4)(a) are all outline levels, but 
 (4) was
 omitted by its authors. It's only implied. This presents an
 interesting challenge when laying out the text. We've
 decided to display a blank section with this note, in order
 to aide readability.

 Trust but verify. 

 Here is the original source for section 5652 

 Do you have an opinion about this solution?
 Drop us a line. 

 Close
