Source URL: https://california.public.law/codes/probate_code_section_5677
Retrieved: 2026-09-23

California Probate Code section 5677 (2025) 

California.Public.Law

 California Codes 

 Remove ads 

 Login 

 Codes 

 Probate Code 

 Div. 5 

 Part 4 

 Chap. 3 

 Creditors 

 § 5677

Probate Code section 5677

 (a)
If proceedings for the administration of the transferor’s estate are commenced, a beneficiary of a revocable transfer on death deed is personally liable to the estate for a share of the transferor’s unsecured debts. 
 (b)
In calculating the beneficiary’s share of liability under subdivision (a), the abatement rules provided in Part 4 (commencing with Section 21400 ) of Division 11 shall be applied, using all of the following assumptions: 
 (1)
The property that was transferred to the beneficiary by revocable transfer on death deed shall be treated as if it were a specific gift made by the decedent’s will. 
 (2)
The value of the property received by the beneficiary pursuant to the revocable transfer on death deed shall be deemed to be the fair market value of the property at the time of the transferor’s death, less the amount of any liens and encumbrances on the property at that time. 
 (3)
Any unsecured debts of the transferor that were paid by the beneficiary pursuant to Section 5672 shall be treated as if they were claims made against the transferor’s estate. 
 (c)
The personal representative shall provide a written statement of liability to the beneficiary, which specifies the amount that must be paid to the estate. 
 (d)
The beneficiary is personally liable to the estate for the amount specified in the statement of liability. Any amount that the beneficiary paid toward the unsecured debts of the transferor pursuant to Section 5672 shall be credited against the amount that the beneficiary owes the estate under this subdivision. If the amount that the beneficiary paid pursuant to Section 5672 exceeds the amount specified in the written statement of liability, the estate shall reimburse the difference to the beneficiary. For the purposes of Section 11420 , this reimbursement shall be deemed an expense of administration. 
 (e)
In the event that the beneficiary and the personal representative cannot agree on the reimbursement or liability due under this section, the beneficiary or personal representative may petition the court for an order determining the amount of the reimbursement or liability. 
 (f)
The reasonable cost of proceeding under this section shall be reimbursed as an extraordinary service under Section 10801 and 10811 . The beneficiary is liable for the payment of that cost, which shall be separately identified in the statement of liability. 

 Source: 
 Section 5677 , https://leginfo.­legislature.­ca.­gov/faces/codes_displaySection.­xhtml?lawCode=PROB§ionNum=5677.­ (updated Jan. 1, 2022; accessed Sep. 21, 2026).

 5670

 5672

 5674

 5677

 5678

Up to date

 Verified: 

Sep. 21, 2026

§ 5677's source at
 ca​.gov 

 Stay Connected

Join thousands of people who receive monthly site updates.

 Subscribe 

 Get Legal Help

The State Bar of California runs a service for finding
an attorney in good standing. Initial consultations
are usually free or discounted: Certified Lawyer Referral Services Directory 

 Committed to Public Service

We will always provide free access to the current law. In addition,
 we provide special support 
for non-profit, educational, and government users. Through social
entre­pre­neurship, we’re lowering the cost of legal services and
increasing citizen access.

 Navigate

 Find a Lawyer 

 Blog 

 About Us 

 API 

 Contact Us 

 Reports 

 Secondary Sources 

 Privacy Policy 

 California: 
 Codes 

 Colorado: 
 C.R.S. 

 Florida: 
 Statutes 

 Nevada: 
 NRS 

 New York: 
 Laws 

 Oregon: 
 OAR , ORS 

 Texas: 
 Statutes 

 World: 
 Rome Statute , International Dictionary 

 Location: 
 https://california.public.law/codes/probate_code_section_5677 

 Original Source: 
 Section 5677 ,
 https://leginfo.­legislature.­ca.­gov/faces/codes_displaySection.­xhtml?lawCode=PROB§ionNum=5677.­ 
(last ac­cessed May 12, 2025).

 Blank Outline Levels

 × 

 The legislature occasionally skips outline levels.
 For example:

 (3) A person may apply [...]
(4)(a) A person petitioning for relief [...] 

 In this example, (3) , (4) ,
 and (4)(a) are all outline levels, but 
 (4) was
 omitted by its authors. It's only implied. This presents an
 interesting challenge when laying out the text. We've
 decided to display a blank section with this note, in order
 to aide readability.

 Trust but verify. 

 Here is the original source for section 5677 

 Do you have an opinion about this solution?
 Drop us a line. 

 Close
