Source URL: https://hcpf.colorado.gov/third-party-liability
Retrieved: 2026-09-23

Third Party Liability | Department of Health Care Policy and Financing 

 Skip to main content

 Search 

 Search 

 Menu

 Home

 For Our Members

 For Our Providers

 For Our Stakeholders

 About Us

 1

 Home 

 For Our Stakeholders 

 Legal 

 Third Party Liability 

Third Party Liability

 Purpose
 Health First Colorado (Colorado's Medicaid program) is the payer of last resort when a member has other insurance or Medicare. Federal regulations require that all available resources be used before Health First Colorado considers payment. This means that if a member is able to provide for their care, the member must pay for medical benefits first. If there is a responsible third-party who should be paying for the member's health benefits -- for example, a health insurance provider -- that responsible third-party should be paying first. Coordinating benefits makes sure that the correct party pays first by, 1) cost-avoiding claims where a known other party should be paying, or 2) cost-recovering from a claim Health First Colorado paid that should have been paid by someone else.

 Cost Avoidance 

 The Department is responsible for identifying all instances where a Medicaid member has commercial insurance or Medicare as their primary payor. The Department utilizes many sources of other coverage such as members, providers, and federal data feeds. The Department has also contracted with a third-party cost avoidance vendor to supply primary payor coverage. The Department utilizes the data it sources to ensure that claims submitted by providers are properly coordinated prior to Medicaid paying.

 Email the Third Party Liability team about member-specific coverage questions 

 Carrier Recoveries

 The Department is responsible for identifying all instances where a Medicaid member has commercial insurance or Medicare as their primary payor. If Medicaid is unable to identify the primary payor and erroneously pays a claim, recovery can be initiated directly from commercial insurance carriers.

 Estate Recoveries

 The Colorado Medical Assistance Estate Recovery Program is a federally mandated program that requires the State of Colorado to recover Health First Colorado expenditures correctly paid on behalf of certain Health First Colorado members. After the death of a person who has received medical assistance, the law requires that certain individual's assets be used to repay the Colorado Department of Health Care Policy and Financing (Department) for these benefits. The Department utilizes a vendor, Health Management Systems (HMS), to administer the estate recovery program. 

 Health Care Policy & Financing and HMS Third Party Liability webpage 

 Health Insurance Buy-In (HIBI)

 When cost effective, the Department pays a member’s commercial insurance premium to assist in retaining the policy of the primary payor. The commercial insurance is billed as primary for services prior to Medicaid issuing payment.

 Health Insurance Buy-In webpage 

 Medicare Buy-In

 Medicare Buy-In is designed to help keep low-income Medicare recipients from having to pay Medicare costs that are continuing to rise, so that these particular Medicaid beneficiaries do not lose their Medicare benefits. The Department pays the Medicare premium for certain clients, allowing them to retain Medicare as their primary payor. 
 Sources for additional Medicare Buy-In Information:
 Medicare Buy-In email inbox (for your questions) 
 Medicare Buy-In webpage (for additional information on this program) 
 Medicaid Savings Programs webpage 

 Public Assistance Reporting Information System (PARIS)

 PARIS is a data matching service that helps to determine whether Medicaid members are receiving duplicate benefits in two or more states. The program verifies Colorado residency, client-reported income, veteran benefits, and works to identify third party insurance coverage. PARIS matches help identify improper payments and minimize fraud, waste, and abuse.
 ACF PARIS website PARIS Email inbox 

 Provider Recoveries

 Erroneous payments to the provider made by Medicaid can be recovered directly from the provider when commercial insurance or Medicare should have been billed as the primary coverage. The Department conducts two types of recovery cycles - Medicare Part A and Part B cycles every other month, Commercial Insurance cycles every quarter.
 The Department has hired a vendor, Health Management Systems (HMS), to initiate and manage provider recoveries. You can reach out to the Provider Relations team using the contact information below:
 Fax phone email Mail 
 877-256-1226 877-262-7396 prdoc@gainwelltechnologies.com Colorado Provider Relations Department - HMS Provider Relations, P.O Box 168528, Irving, TX 75016-8528 

 Tort & Casualty

 The Tort and Casualty Unit in the Third Party Liability & Recoveries section of the Department recovers money from a legally responsible third party when the Department has paid claims on behalf of a Health First Colorado (Colorado's Medicaid Program) member. These circumstances commonly include payments, awards, or settlements from auto, homeowners' and malpractice insurance carriers intended to compensate the members for their injuries. Health First Colorado has an automatic lien by statute in these circumstances.  

 Tort and Casualty webpage 

 Trusts

 The Trust Policy & Recoveries Section reviews trusts created by or benefiting individuals applying for or receiving medical assistance and then issues formal guidance to eligibility sites and other stakeholders on how these trusts impact eligibility. This Section also recovers funds from trusts that require repayment to the Department under federal and state law and collects funds from other post-death recoveries not subject to estate recovery (i.e., annuity closures, etc.). Any submissions or inquiries concerning trusts or these recoveries should be sent to medicaid.trusts@state.co.us .

 Trusts webpage 

 Third Party Liability Resource Links

 Deficit Reduction Act (DRA), Important Facts for State Government Officials

 Title 42 - Federal Regulations

 State Regulations (See §25.5 for HCPF statutes)

 C.R.S. §25.5-4-209

 Code of Colorado Regulations

 State Plan Amendment

 Health First Colorado Legal Homepage

 Fraud, Waste and Abuse Homepage

 Learn More 
 Accessibility 
 Nondiscrimination 
 Privacy Practices 
 Americans with Disabilities Act 
 Website Feedback 
 Contact Us 
 Member Contact Center 
 1-800-221-3943  / State Relay: 711 

 Our Mission 
 Improve health care equity, access and outcomes for the people we serve while saving Coloradans money on health care and driving value for Colorado. 
 Department Performance Plan 
 Healthy Colorado For All 

 HCPF Social Media 
 -->

 placeholder

 © 2026 State of Colorado

 Transparency Online 

 General Notices 

 Colorado Official State Web Portal
