Source URL: https://www.sos.state.co.us/CCR/GenerateRulePdf.do?ruleVersionId=11946&fileName=10+CCR+2505-10+8.100
Retrieved: 2026-09-23

CodeofCol
        oradoRegul
                 ati
                   ons
Secr
   etar
      yofStat
            e
St
 ateofCol
        orado




    DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH CARE POLICY AND FINANCING

    Medical Services Board

    MEDICAL ASSISTANCE - SECTION 8.100 Eligibility, Provider Screening, NPI

    10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
    [Editor’s Notes follow the text of the rules at the end of this CCR Document.]

    _______________________________________________________________________________

    8.100     MEDICAL ASSISTANCE ELIGIBILITY

    8.100.1             Definitions

    300% Institutionalized Special Income Group is a Medical Assistance category that provides Long-Term
    Care Services to aged or disabled individuals.

    1619b is section 1619b of the Social Security Act which allows individuals who are eligible for
    Supplemental Security Income (SSI) to continue to be eligible for Medical Assistance coverage after they
    return to work.

    AB - Aid to the Blind is a program which provides financial assistance to low-income blind persons.

    ABD - Aged, Blind and Disabled Medical Assistance is a group of Medical Assistance categories for
    individuals that have been deemed to be aged, blind, or disabled by the Social Security Administration or
    the Department.

    Achieving a Better Life Experience (ABLE) accounts - Special savings accounts that are set up by (or for)
    certain individuals with disabilities in a qualified ABLE program that are exempt for eligibility. They can be
    established by any state’s qualified ABLE Program. Colorado’s ABLE program is administered by the
    Department of Higher Education.

    Adjusted Gross Income (AGI)-means “gross income”, as defined in federal tax rules, minus certain
    adjustments prescribed in the federal tax rules to derive the “Adjusted Gross Income” line on the tax
    return. These adjustments from gross income are taken before the taxpayer takes his or her Schedule A
    deductions or Standard Deduction.

    Adult MAGI Medical Assistance Group provides Medical Assistance to eligible adults from the age of 19
    through the end of the month that the individual turns 65, who do not receive or who are ineligible for
    Medicare.

    AND - Aid to Needy Disabled is a program which provides financial assistance to low-income persons
    over age 18 who have a total disability which is expected to last six months or longer and prevents them
    from working.

    AFDC - Aid to Families with Dependent Children is the Title IV federal assistance program in effect from
    1935 to 1997 which was administered by the United States Department of Health and Human Services.
    This program provided financial assistance to children whose families had low or no income.

    AP-5615 is the form used to determine the patient payment for clients in nursing facilities receiving Long
    Term Care.

    Alien is a person who was not born in the United States and who is not a naturalized citizen.




                                                                                                                 1
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                              10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


Ambulatory Services is any medical care delivered on an outpatient basis.

Annuity is an investment vehicle whereby an individual establishes a right to receive fixed periodic
payments, either for life or a term of years.

Applicant is an individual who is seeking an eligibility determination for Medical Assistance through the
submission of an application.

Application Date is the date the application is received and date-stamped by the eligibility site or the date
the application was received and date-stamped by an Application Assistance site or Presumptive
Eligibility site. In the absence of a date-stamp, the application date is the date that the application was
signed by the client.

Application for Public Assistance is the designated application used to determine eligibility for financial
assistance. It can also be used to determine eligibility for Medical Assistance.

Blindness is defined in this volume as the total lack of vision or vision in the better eye of 20/200 or less
with the use of a correcting lens and/or tunnel vision to the extent that the field of vision is no greater than
20 degrees.

Burial Spaces are burial plots, gravesites, crypts, mausoleums, urns, niches and other customary and
traditional repositories for the deceased's bodily remains provided such spaces are owned by the
individual or are held for his or her use, including necessary and reasonable improvements or additions to
or upon such burial spaces such as: vaults, headstones, markers, plaques, or burial containers and
arrangements for opening and closing the gravesite for burial of the deceased.

Burial Trusts are irrevocable pre-need funeral agreements with a funeral director or other entity to meet
the expenses associated with burial for Medical Assistance applicants/recipients. The agreement can
include burial spaces as well as the services of the funeral director.

Caretaker Relative is a person who is related to the dependent child or any adult with whom the
dependent child is living and who assumes responsibility for the dependent child’s care.

Case Management Services are services provided by community mental health centers, clinics,
community centered boards, and EPSDT case managers to assist in providing services to Medical
Assistance clients in gaining access to needed medical, social, educational and other services.

Cash Surrender Value is the amount the insurer will pay to the owner upon cancellation of the policy
before the death of the insured or before maturity of the policy.

Categorically Eligible means persons who are eligible for Medical Assistance due to their eligibility for one
or more Federal categories of public assistance.

CBMS - Colorado Benefits Management System is the computer system that determines an applicant’s
eligibility for public assistance in the state of Colorado.

CDHS -Colorado Department of Human Services is the state department responsible for administering
the social service and financial assistance programs for Colorado.

Children MAGI Medical Assistance group provides Medical Assistance coverage to tax dependents or
otherwise eligible applicants through the end of the month that the individual turns 19 years old.

Child Support Services is a CDHS program that assures that all children receive financial and medical
support from each parent. This is accomplished by locating each parent, establishing paternity and
support obligations, and enforcing those obligations.




                                                                                                                2
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                           10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


Citizen is a person who was born in the United States or who has been naturalized.

Client is a person who is eligible for the Medical Assistance Program. “Client” is used interchangeably
with “recipient” when the person is eligible for the program.

CMS - Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services is the Federal agency within the US Department of
Health and Human Services that partners with the states to administer Medicaid and CHP+ via State
Plans in effect for each State. Colorado is in Region VIII.

CHP+ - Child Health Plan Plus is low-cost health insurance for Colorado's uninsured children and
pregnant women. CHP+ is public health insurance for children and pregnant women who earn too much
to qualify for The Medical Assistance Program, but cannot afford private health insurance.

COLA - Cost of Living Adjustment is an annual increase in the dollar value of benefits made automatically
by the United States Department of Health and Human Services or the state in OASDI, SSI and OAP
cases to account for rises in the cost of living due to inflation.

Colorado State Plan is a written statement which describes the purpose, nature, and scope of the
Colorado’s Medical Assistance Program. The Plan is submitted to the CMS and assures that the program
is administered consistently within specific requirements set forth in both the Social Security Act and the
Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) in order for a state to be eligible for Federal Financial Participation
(FFP).

Common Law Marriage is legally recognized as a marriage in the State of Colorado under certain
circumstances even though no legally recognized marriage ceremony is performed or civil marriage
contract is executed. Individuals declaring or publicly holding themselves out as a married couple through
verbal or written methods may be recognized as legally married under state law. C.R.S. § 14-2-104(3).

Community Centered Boards are private non-profit organizations designated in statute as the single entry
point into the long-term service and support system for persons with developmental disabilities.

Community Spouse is the spouse of an institutionalized spouse.

Community Spouse Resource Allowance is the amount of resources that the Medical Assistance
regulations permit the spouse staying at home to retain.

Complete Application means an application in which all questions have been answered, which is signed,
and for which all required verifications have been submitted.

The Department is defined in this volume as the Colorado Department of Health Care Policy and
Financing which is responsible for administering the Colorado Medical Assistance Program and Child
Health Plan Plus programs as well as other State-funded health care programs.

Dependent Child is a child who lives with a parent, legal guardian, caretaker relative or foster parent and
is under the age of 18, or, is age 18 and a full-time student, and expected to graduate by age 19.

Dependent Relative for purposes of this rule is defined as one who is claimed as a dependent by an
applicant for federal income tax purposes.

Difficulty of Care Payments is a payment to an applicant or member as compensation for providing live-in
home care to an individual who qualifies for foster care or Home and Community Based Services (HCBS)
waiver program and lives in the home of the care recipient. This additional care must be required due to a
physical, mental, or emotional handicap.




                                                                                                              3
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                           10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


Disability means the inability to do any substantial gainful activity (or, in the case of a child, having
marked and severe functional limitations) by reason of a medically determinable physical or mental
impairment(s) which can be expected to result in death or which has lasted or can be expected to last for
a continuous period of l2 months or more.

Dual Eligible clients are Medicare beneficiaries who are also eligible for Medical Assistance.

Earned Income is defined for purposes of this volume as any compensation from participation in a
business, including wages, salary, tips, commissions and bonuses.

Earned Income Disregards are the allowable deductions and exclusions subtracted from the gross
earnings. Income disregards vary in amount and type, depending on the category of assistance.

Electronic Data Source is an interface established with a federal or state agency, commercial entity, or
other data sources obtained through data sharing agreements to verify data used in determining eligibility.
The active interfaces are identified in the Department’s verification plan submitted to CMS.

Eligibility Site is defined in this volume as a location outside of the Department that has been deemed by
the Department as eligible to accept applications and determine eligibility for applicants.

Employed means that an individual has earned income and is working part time, full time or is self-
employed, and has proof of employment. Volunteer or in-kind work is not considered employment.

EPSDT- Early Periodic Screening, Diagnosis and Treatment is the child health component of the Medical
Assistance Program. It is required in every state and is designed to improve the health of low-income
children by financing appropriate, medically necessary services and providing outreach and case
management services for all eligible individuals.

Equity Value is the fair market value of land or other asset less any encumbrances.

Ex Parte Review is an administrative review of eligibility during a redetermination period in lieu of
performing a redetermination from the client. This administrative review is performed by verifying current
information obtained from another current aid program.

Face Value of a Life Insurance Policy is the basic death benefit of the policy exclusive of dividend
additions or additional amounts payable because of accidental death or other special provisions.

Fair Market Value is the average price a similar property will sell for on the open market to a private
individual in the particular geographic area involved. Also, the price at which the property would change
hands between a willing buyer and a willing seller, neither being under any pressure to buy or to sell and
both having reasonable knowledge of relevant facts.

FBR - The Federal Benefit Rate is the monthly Supplemental Security Income payment amount for a
single individual or a couple. The FBR is used by the Aged, Blind and Disabled Medical Assistance
Programs as the eligibility income limits.

FFP - Federal Financial Participation as defined in this volume is the amount or percentage of funds
provided by the Federal Government to administer the Colorado Medical Assistance Program.

FPL - Federal Poverty Level is a simplified version of the federal poverty thresholds used to determine
financial eligibility for assistance programs. The thresholds are issued each year in the Federal Register
by the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS).

Good Cause is the client’s justification for needing additional time due to extenuating circumstances,
usually used when extending deadlines for submittal of required documentation.




                                                                                                             4
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                              10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


Good Cause for Child Support is the specific process and criteria that can be applied when a client is
refusing to cooperate in the establishment of paternity or establishment and enforcement of a child
support order due to extenuating circumstances.

HCBS are Home and Community Based Services are also referred to as “waiver programs”. HCBS
provides services beyond those covered by the Medical Assistance Program that enable individuals to
remain in a community setting rather than being admitted to a Long-Term Care institution.

In-Kind Income is income a person receives in a form other than money. It may be received in exchange
for work or service (earned income) or a non-cash gift or contribution (unearned income).

Inpatient is an individual who has been admitted to a medical institution on recommendation of a
physician or dentist and who receives room, board and professional services for 24 hours or longer, or is
expected to receive these services for 24 hours or longer.

Institution is an establishment that furnishes, in single or multiple facilities, food, shelter and some
treatment or services to four or more persons unrelated to the proprietor.

Institutionalization is the commitment of a patient to a health care facility for treatment.

Institutionalized Individual is a person who is institutionalized in a medical facility, a Long-Term Care
institution, or applying for or receiving Home and Community Based Services (HCBS) or the Program of
All Inclusive Care for the Elderly (PACE).

Institutionalized Spouse is a Medicaid eligible client who begins a stay in a medical institution or nursing
facility on or after September 30, 1989, or is first enrolled as a Medical Assistance client in the Program of
All Inclusive Care for the Elderly (PACE) on or after October 10, 1997, or receives Home and Community
Based Services (HCBS) on or after July 1, 1999; and is married to a spouse who is not in a medical
institution or nursing facility. An institutionalized spouse does not include any such individual who is not
likely to be in a medical institution or nursing facility or to receive HCBS or PACE for at least 30
consecutive days. Irrevocable means that the contract, trust, or other arrangement cannot be terminated,
and that the funds cannot be used for any purpose other than outlined in the document.

Insurance Affordability Program (IAP) refers to Medicaid, Child Health Plan Plus (CHP+), and premium
and cost-sharing assistance for purchasing private health insurance through state insurance marketplace.

Legal Immigrant is an individual who is not a citizen or national and has been permitted to remain in the
United States by the United States Citizenship and Immigration Services (USCIS) either temporarily or as
an actual or prospective permanent resident or whose extended physical presence in the United States is
known to and allowed by USCIS.

Legal Immigrant Prenatal is a medical program that provides medical coverage for pregnant legal
immigrants who have been legal immigrants for less than five years.

Limited Disability for the Medicaid Buy-In Program for Working Adults with Disabilities means that an
individual has a disability that would meet the definition of disability under SSA without regard to
Substantial Gainful Activity (SGA).

Long-Term Care is Medical Assistance services that provides nursing-home care, home-health care,
personal or adult day care for individuals aged at least 65 years or with a chronic or disabling condition.

Long-Term Care Institution means class I nursing facilities, intermediate care facilities for intellectual and
developmental disabilities (ICF/IDD) and swing bed facilities. Long-Term Care institutions can include
hospitals.




                                                                                                                 5
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                           10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


Long-Term Services and Supports Level of Care Eligibility Determination is the determination using the
state prescribed assessment instrument that an individual does or does not meet institutional level of
care.

Long-Term Services and Supports Level of Care Eligibility Determination Screen is a comprehensive
evaluation with an individual seeking services and appropriate collaterals (such as family members,
friends, and/or caregivers) to determine the individual’s eligibility for long-term services and supports
based on their need for institutional level of care as determined using the state prescribed assessment
instrument.

Managed care system is a system for providing health care services which integrates both the delivery
and the financing of health care services in an attempt to provide access to medical services while
containing the cost and use of medical care.

Medical Assistance is defined as all medical programs administered by the Department of Health Care
Policy and Financing. Medical Assistance/Medicaid is the joint state/federal health benefits program for
individuals and families with low income and resources. It is an entitlement program that is jointly funded
by the states and federal government and administered by the state. This program provides for payment
of all or part of the cost of care for medical services.

Medical Assistance Required Household is defined for purposes of this volume as all parents or caretaker
relatives, spouses, and dependent children residing in the same home.

Minimal Verification is defined in this volume as the minimum amount of information needed to process
an application for benefits. No other verification can be requested from clients unless the information
provided is questionable or inconsistent.

Minimum Essential Coverage is the type of coverage one must maintain to be in compliance with the
Affordable Care Act in order to avoid paying a penalty for being uninsured. Minimum essential coverage
may include but not limited to: Medicaid; CHP+; private health plans through Connect for Health
Colorado; Medicare; job-based insurance, and certain other coverage.

MMMNA - Minimum Monthly Maintenance Needs Allowance is the calculation used to determine the
amount of institutionalized spouse’s income that the community spouse is allowed to retain to meet their
monthly living needs.

MAGI - Modified Adjusted Gross Income refers to the methodology by which income and household
composition are determined for the MAGI Medical Assistance groups under the Affordable Care Act.
These MAGI groups include Parents and Caretaker Relatives, Pregnant Women, Children, and Adults.
For a more complete description of the MAGI categories and pursuant rules, please refer to section
8.100.4.

MIA - Monthly Income Allowance is the amount of institutionalized spouse’s income that the community
spouse is allowed to retain to meet their monthly living needs.

MSP - Medicare Savings Program is a Medical Assistance Program to assist in the payment of Medicare
premium, coinsurance and deductible amounts. There are four groups that are eligible for payment or
part-payment of Medicare premiums, coinsurance and deductibles: Qualified Medicare Beneficiaries
(QMBs), Specified Low-Income Medicare Beneficiaries (SLIMBs), Qualified Disabled and Working
Individuals (QDWIs), and Qualifying Individuals - 1 (QI-1s).

Non-Filer is an individual who neither files a tax return nor is claimed as a tax dependent. For a more
complete description of how household composition is determined for the MAGI Medical Assistance
groups, please refer to the MAGI household composition section at 8.100.4.E.




                                                                                                              6
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                                 10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


Nursing Facility is a facility or distinct part of a facility which is maintained primarily for the care and
treatment of inpatients under the direction of a physician. The patients in such a facility require
supportive, therapeutic, or compensating services and the availability of a licensed nurse for observation
or treatment on a twenty-four-hour basis.

OAP - Old Age Pension is a financial assistance program for low income adults age 60 or older.

OASDI - Old Age, Survivors and Disability Insurance is the official term Social Security uses for Social
Security Act Title II benefits including retirement, survivors, and disability. This does not include SSI
payments.

Outpatient is a patient who is not hospitalized overnight but who visits a hospital, clinic, or associated
facility for diagnosis or treatment. Is a patient who does not require admittance to a facility to receive
medical services.

PACE - Program of All-inclusive Care for the Elderly is a unique, capitated managed care benefit for the
frail elderly provided by a not-for-profit or public entity. The PACE program features a comprehensive
medical and social service delivery system using an interdisciplinary team approach in an adult day
health center that is supplemented by in-home and referral services in accordance with participants'
needs.

Parent and Caretaker Relative is a MAGI Medical Assistance group that provides Medical Assistance to
adults who are parents or Caretaker Relatives of dependent children.

Patient is an individual who is receiving needed professional services that are directed by a licensed
practitioner of the healing arts toward maintenance, improvement, or protection of health, or lessening of
illness, disability, or pain.

PEAK - the Colorado Program Eligibility and Application Kit is a web-based portal used to apply for public
assistance benefits in the State of Colorado, including Medical Assistance.

PNA - Personal Needs Allowance means moneys received by any person admitted to a nursing care
facility or Long-Term Care Institution which are received by said person to purchase necessary clothing,
incidentals, or other personal needs items which are not reimbursed by a Federal or state program.

Pregnant Women is a MAGI Medical Assistance group that provides Medical Assistance coverage to
pregnant women whose MAGI-based income calculation is less than 195% FPL, including women who
are in their 12 months post-partum.

Premium means the monthly amount an individual pays to participate in a Medicaid Buy-In Program.

Provider is any person, public or private institution, agency, or business concern enrolled under the state
Medical Assistance program to provide medical care, services, or goods and holding a current valid
license or certificate to provide such services or to dispense such goods.

Psychiatric Facility is a facility that is licensed as a residential care facility or hospital and that provides
inpatient psychiatric services for individuals under the direction of a licensed physician.

Public Institution means an institution that is the responsibility of a governmental unit or over which a
governmental unit exercises administrative control.

Questionable is defined as inconsistent or contradictory tangible information, statements, documents, or
file records.




                                                                                                                   7
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                             10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


Reasonable Compatibility refers to an allowable difference or discrepancy between the income an
applicant self attests and the amount of income reported by an electronic data source. For a more
complete description of how reasonable compatibility is used to determine an applicant’s financial
eligibility for Medical Assistance, please refer to the MAGI Income section at 8.100.4.C

Reasonable Explanation refers to the opportunity afforded an applicant to explain a discrepancy between
self-attested income and income as reported by an electronic data source, when the difference is above
the threshold percentage for reasonable compatibility.

Recipient is any person who has been determined eligible to receive benefits.

Resident is any individual who is living within the state and considers the state as their place of residence.
Residents include any unemancipated child whose parent or other person exercising custody lives within
the state.

RRB - Railroad Retirement Benefits is a benefit program under Federal law 45 U.S.C. § 231 et seq that
became effective in 1935. It provides retirement benefits to retired railroad workers and families from a
special fund, which is separate from the Social Security fund.

Secondary School is a school or educational program that provides instruction or training towards a high
school diploma or an equivalent degree such as a High School Equivalency Diploma (HSED).

SGA - Substantial Gainful Activity is defined by the Social Security Administration. SGA is the term used
to describe a level of work activity and earnings. Work is “substantial” if it involves performance of
significant physical or mental activities or a combination of both, which are productive in nature. For work
activity to be substantial, it does not need to be performed on a full-time basis. Work activity performed on
a part-time basis may also be substantial gainful activity. “Gainful” work activity is work performed for pay
or profit; or work of a nature generally performed for pay or profit; or work intended for profit, whether or
not a profit is realized.

Single Entry Point Agency means the organization selected to provide case management functions for
persons in need of Long-Term Care services within a Single Entry Point District.

Single Streamlined Application or “SSAp” is the general application for health assistance benefits through
which applicants will be screened for Medical Assistance programs including Medicaid, CHP+, or
premium and cost-sharing assistance for purchasing private health insurance through a state insurance
marketplace.

SISC- Supplemental Income Status Codes are system codes used to distinguish the different types of
state supplementary benefits (such as OAP) a recipient may receive. Supplemental Income Status Codes
determine the FFP for benefits paid on behalf of groups covered under the Medical Assistance program.

SSA - Social Security Administration is an agency of the United States federal government that
administers Social Security, a social insurance program consisting of retirement, disability, and survivors'
benefits.

SSI - Supplemental Security Income is a Federal income supplement program funded by general tax
revenues (not Social Security taxes) that provides income to aged, blind or disabled individuals with little
or no income and resources.

SSI Eligible means an individual who is eligible to receive Supplemental Security Income under Title XVI
of the Social Security Act, and may or may not be receiving the monetary payment.

TANF - Temporary Assistance to Needy Families is the Federal assistance program which provides
supportive services and federal benefits to families with little or no income or resources. It is the Block




                                                                                                               8
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                              10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


Grant that was established under the Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act in
Title IV of the Social Security Act.

Tax Dependent is anyone expected to be claimed as a dependent by a Tax-Filer.

Tax-Filer is an individual, head of household or married couple who is required to and who files a
personal income tax return.

Third Party is an individual, institution, corporation, or public or private agency which is or may be liable to
pay all or any part of the medical cost of an injury, a disease, or the disability of an applicant for or
recipient of Medical Assistance.

Title XIX is the portion of the federal Social Security Act which authorizes a joint federal/state Medicaid
program. Title XIX contains federal regulations governing the Medicaid program.

TMA - Transitional Medical Assistance is a Medical Assistance category for families that lost Medical
Assistance coverage due to increased earned income or loss of earned income disregards.

Unearned Income is the gross amount received in cash or kind that is not earned from employment or
self-employment.

VA - Veterans Affairs is The Department of Veterans Affairs which provides patient care and Federal
benefits to veterans and their dependents.

8.100.2          Legal Basis

Constitution of Colorado, Article XXIV, Old Age Pensions, section 7, established a health and medical
care fund for persons who qualify to receive old age pensions.

Colorado Revised Statutes, Title 25.5, Article 4, Colorado Medical Assistance Act, section 102, provides
for a program of Medical Assistance for individuals and families, whose income and resources are
insufficient to meet the costs of necessary medical care and services, to be administered in cooperation
with the federal government.

The Social Security Act, Title XIX, Grants to States for Medical Assistance Programs, and the consequent
Federal regulations, Title 42, CFR (Code of Federal Regulations), Chapter IV, Subchapter C, set forth the
conditions for states to obtain Federal Financial Participation in Medical Assistance expenditures.

Under the Colorado Medical Assistance Program, the Medicaid program provides coverage of certain
groups specified in Title XIX of the Social Security Act. The OAP State Only Medical Assistance Program
provides coverage to certain old age pension clients entitled to health and medical care under the
Colorado Constitution.

The Department of Health Care Policy and Financing is the single State agency designated to administer
the Colorado Medical Assistance Program under Title XIX of the Social Security Act and Colorado
statutes. The Office of Medical Assistance of the Department is delegated the duties and responsibilities
for administration of the Colorado Medical Assistance Program.




                                                                                                               9
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                           10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


8.100.3.       Medical Assistance General Eligibility Requirements

8.100.3.A.     Application Requirements

1.     The eligibility site shall advise individuals concerning the benefits of the Medical Assistance
       Program and determine or redetermine eligibility for Medical Assistance in accordance with rules
       and regulations of the Department. A person who is applying for the Medical Assistance Program
       or a client who is determined ineligible for the Medical Assistance Program in one category shall
       be evaluated under all other categories of eligibility. There is no time limit for Medical Assistance
       coverage as long as the client remains categorically eligible.

2.     If the applicant applied for Medical Assistance on the Single Streamlined Application and was
       found ineligible, this application shall be reviewed for all other Medical Assistance eligibility
       programs, the Child Health Plan Plus (CHP+) program and premium and cost-sharing assistance
       for purchasing private health insurance through the state insurance marketplace.

       a.      The application data and verifications shall be automatically transferred to the state
               insurance marketplace through a system interface when applicants are found ineligible
               for Medical Assistance eligibility programs. If an individual is pending for a Non-MAGI
               Medical Assistance eligibility program but has been found financially ineligible for MAGI
               Medical Assistance eligibility programs, the application data and verifications shall be
               transferred to the state insurance marketplace.

3.     Persons applying for assistance need complete only one application form to apply for both
       Medical Assistance and Financial Assistance under the Federal or State Financial Assistance
       Programs administered in the county. The application will be the Application for Public
       Assistance.

4.     If an applicant is found to be ineligible for a particular program, the Application for Public
       Assistance shall be reviewed and processed for other financial programs the household has
       requested on the Application for Public Assistance and all other Medical Assistance Programs.
       Referrals to other community agencies and organizations shall be made for the applicant
       whenever available or requested.

5.     The applicant must sign the application form, give declaration in lieu of a signature by telephone,
       or may opt to use an electronic signature in order to receive Medical Assistance.

6.     A family member, adult in the applicant’s Medical Assistance Required Household or authorized
       representative may submit an application and request assistance on behalf of an applicant.

7.     If the applicant is not able to participate in the completion of the application forms because they
       are a minor (as defined in C.R.S. § 13-22-101) or due to physical or mental incapacity, the
       spouse, other relative, friend, or representative acting responsibly on behalf of the applicant may
       complete the forms. When no such person is available to assist in these situations, the eligibility
       site shall assist the applicant in the completion of the necessary forms. This type of situation
       should be identified clearly in the case record.

8.     For the purpose of Medical Assistance, when an applicant is incompetent or incapacitated and
       unable to sign an application, or in case of death of the applicant, the application shall be signed,
       under penalty of perjury, by someone acting responsibly on behalf of the applicant either:

       a.      A parent, or other specified relative, or legally appointed guardian or conservator, or

       b.      For a person in a medical institution for whom none of the above in 8.a. are available, an
               authorized official of the institution may sign the application.




                                                                                                          10
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                              10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


9.     Application interviews or requested visits to the eligibility site for Medical Assistance shall not be
       required. All correspondence may occur by mail, email or telephone.

10.    During normal business hours, eligibility sites shall not restrict the hours in which applicants may
       file an application. The eligibility site must afford any individual wishing to do so the opportunity to
       apply for Medical Assistance without delay.

11.    The applicant has the right to withdraw his or her application at any time.

8.100.3.B.     Residency Requirements

1.     Individuals shall make application in the county in which they live. Individuals who reside in a
       county but who do not reside in a permanent dwelling nor have a fixed mailing address shall be
       considered eligible for the Medical Assistance Program, provided all other eligibility requirements
       are met. In no instance shall there be a durational residency requirement imposed upon the
       applicant, nor shall there be a requirement for the applicant to reside in a permanent dwelling or
       have a fixed mailing address. If an individual without a permanent dwelling or fixed mailing
       address is hospitalized, the county where the hospital is located shall be responsible for
       processing the application to completion. If the individual moves prior to completion of the
       eligibility determination the origination eligibility site completes the determination and transfers the
       case as applicable.

       a.      For applicants in Long Term Care institutions - The county of domicile for all Long Term
               Care clients is the county in which they are physically located and receiving services.

2.     A resident of Colorado is defined as a person that is living within the state of Colorado and
       considers Colorado to be their place of residence at the time of application. For institutionalized
       individuals who are incapable of indicating intent as to their state of residence, the state of
       residence shall be where the institution is located unless that state determines that the individual
       is a resident of another state, by applying the following criteria:

       a.      for any institutionalized individual who is under age 21 or who is age 21 or older and
               incapable of indicating intent before age 21, the state of residence is that of the
               individual's parent(s) or legally appointed guardian at the time of placement;

       b.      for any institutionalized individual who became incapable of indicating intent at or after
               age 21, (1) the state of residence is the state in which the person was living when he or
               she became incapable of indicating intent, or (2) if this cannot be determined, the state of
               residence is the state in which the person was living when he or she was first determined
               to be incapable of indicating intent;

       c.      upon placement in another state, the new state is the state of residence unless the
               current state of residence is involved in the placement. If a current state arranged for an
               individual to be placed in an institution located in another state, the current state shall be
               the individual's state of residence, irrespective of the individual's indicated intent or ability
               to indicate intent;

       d.      in the case of conflicting opinions between states, the state of residence is the state
               where the individual is physically located.

3.     For purposes of this section on establishing an individual's state of residence, an individual is
       considered incapable of indicating intent if:

       a.      the person has an I.Q. of 49 or less or has a mental age of 7 or less, based on
               standardized tests as specified in the persons in medical facilities section of this volume;




                                                                                                              11
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                               10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


       b.      the person is judged legally incompetent; or

       c.      medical documentation, or other documentation acceptable to the eligibility site, supports
               a finding that the person is incapable of indicating intent.

4.     Residence shall be retained until abandoned. A person temporarily absent from the state, inside
       or outside the United States, retains Colorado residence. Temporarily absent means that at the
       time he/she leaves, the person intends to return.

5.     A non-resident shall mean a person who considers his/her place of residence to be other than
       Colorado. Any person who enters the state to receive Medical Assistance or for any other reason
       is a non-resident, so long as they consider their permanent place of residence to be outside of the
       state of Colorado.

8.100.3.C.     Transferring Requirements

1.     When a family or individual moves from one county to another within Colorado, the client shall
       report the change of address to the eligibility site responsible for the current active Medical
       Assistance Program case(s). If a household applies in the county in which they live and then
       moves out of that county during the application determination process, the originating eligibility
       site shall complete the processing of that application before transferring the case. The originating
       eligibility site shall electronically transfer the case to the new county of residence in CBMS.

2.     The originating eligibility site must notify the receiving eligibility site of the client's transfer of
       Medical Assistance. The originating eligibility site may notify the receiving eligibility site by
       telephone that a client has moved to the receiving county. If the family or individual wishes to
       apply for other types of assistance, they shall submit a new application to the receiving eligibility
       site.

3.     If the household is transferring the current Medical Assistance case, the receiving eligibility site
       cannot mandate a new application, verification, or an office visit to authorize the transfer. The
       receiving eligibility site can request copies of specific case documents to be forwarded from the
       originating eligibility site to verify the data contained in CBMS.

4.     If the originating eligibility site closes a case for the discontinuation reason of “unable to locate,”
       the applicant shall reapply at the receiving eligibility site for the Medical Assistance Program.

5.     If a case is closed for any other discontinuation reason than “unable to locate” and the client
       provides appropriate information to overturn the discontinuation with the originating eligibility site,
       then, upon transfer, the receiving eligibility site shall reopen the case with case comments in
       CBMS. These actions shall be performed according to timeframes defined by the Department.

6.     When a recipient moves from his/her home to a nursing facility in another county or when a
       recipient moves from one nursing facility to another in a different county:

       a.      the initiating eligibility site will transfer the case electronically in the eligibility system to
               the eligibility site in which the nursing facility is located when the individual is determined
               eligible; and

       b.      The following items shall be furnished by the initiating eligibility site to the new eligibility
               site in hard copy format or via electronic transmission:

               i)       5615 that was sent to the nursing facility indicating the case transfer; and

               ii)      Identification and citizenship documents; and




                                                                                                                  12
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                             10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


               iii)     Long-Term Services and Supports Level of Care Eligibility Determination

7.     When transferring a case, the initiating eligibility site will send an AP-5615 form to the nursing
       facility administrator of the new nursing facility showing the date of case closure and the current
       patient payment at the time of transfer. Should the Medical Assistance Program reimbursement
       be interrupted, the receiving eligibility site will have the responsibility to process the application
       and back date the Medical Assistance eligibility date to cover the period of ineligibility.

8.100.3.D.     Processing Requirements

1.     The eligibility site shall process a Single Streamlined Application for Medical Assistance Program
       benefits within the following deadlines:

       a.      90 days for persons who apply for the Medical Assistance Program and a disability
               determination is required.

       b.      45 days for all other Medical Assistance Program applicants.

       c.      The above deadlines cover the period from the date of receipt of a complete application
               to the date the eligibility site mails a notice of its decision to the applicant.

       d.      In unusual circumstances, documented in the case record and in CBMS case comments,
               the eligibility site may delay its decision on the application beyond the applicable deadline
               at its discretion. Examples of such unusual circumstances are a delay or failure by the
               applicant or an examining physician to take a required action such as submitting required
               documentation, or an administrative or other emergency beyond the agency's control.

       e.      Due to the Coronavirus COVID-19 Public Health Emergency, required through the
               Federal CARES Act for the Maintenance of Effort (MOE), the Department will continue
               eligibility for all Medical Assistance categories, regardless of changes made for a
               redetermination or additional documentation for current Medicaid enrollees. The
               Department will allow these individuals to continue eligibility through the period of the
               COVID-19 pandemic federal emergency declaration. Once the federal emergency
               declaration has concluded, the Department will process eligibility redeterminations and
               /or changes for all members whose eligibility was maintained during the emergency
               declaration. Effective May 11, 2023 the coronavirus COVID-19 pandemic federal
               emergency has been declared to end. To ensure the Department Maintains access to
               State and Federal funding provided by the Federal ‘Families First Coronavirus Response
               Act” Pub.L. 116-127, and the Federal “Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2023”, the
               Department will process eligibility redeterminations and take appropriate action for all
               members whose eligibility was maintained during the emergency declaration. By May
               2024 all members whose eligibility has been maintained due to the Public Health
               Emergency will have completed the renewal process. A member’s eligibility may no
               longer be maintained after May 31, 2023 if they have completed the renewal process
               and/or a change is reported, and they are found ineligible. Members whose eligibility has
               been maintained during the Public Health Emergency and whose renewal is not due yet
               will remain in their current category until their renewal due month, regardless if there is a
               change reported that makes them ineligible.

2.     Upon request, applicants will be given an extension of time within the application processing
       timeframe to submit requested verification. Applicants may request an extension of time beyond
       the application processing timeframe to obtain necessary verification. The extension may be
       granted at the eligibility site's discretion. The amount of time given should be determined on a
       case-by-case basis and should be based on the amount of time the individual needs to obtain the
       required documentation.




                                                                                                            13
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                            10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


3.    The eligibility site shall not use the above timeframes as a waiting period before determining
      eligibility or as a reason for denying eligibility.

4.    For clients who apply for the Medical Assistance Program and a disability determination is
      required, the eligibility site shall send a notice informing the applicant of the reason for a delay
      beyond the applicable deadline, and of the applicant's right to appeal if dissatisfied with the delay.
      The eligibility site shall send this notice no later than 91 days following the application for the
      Medical Assistance Program.

5.    For information regarding continuation of benefits during the pendency of an appeal to the Social
      Security Administration (SSA) based upon termination of disability benefits see section 8.057.5.C.

6.    Eligibility sites at which an individual is able to apply for Medical Assistance benefits shall also
      provide the applicant the opportunity to register to vote.

      a.      The eligibility site shall provide to the applicant the prescribed voter registration
              application.

      b.      The eligibility site shall not:

              i)       Seek to influence the applicant's political preference or party registration;

              ii)      Display any political preference or party allegiance;

              iii)     Make any statement to the applicant or take any action, the purpose or effect of
                       which is to discourage the applicant from registering to vote; and

              iv)      Make any statement to an applicant which is to lead the applicant to believe that
                       a decision to register or not to register has any bearing on the availability of
                       services or benefits.

      c.      The eligibility site shall ensure the confidentiality of individuals registering and declining to
              register to vote.

      d.      Records concerning registration and declination to register to vote shall be maintained for
              two years by the eligibility site. These records shall not be part of the public assistance
              case record.

      e.      A completed voter registration application shall be transmitted to the county clerk and
              recorder for the county in which the eligibility site is located not later than ten (10) days
              after the date of acceptance; except that if a registration application is accepted within
              five (5) days before the last day for registration to vote in an election, the application shall
              be transmitted to the county clerk and recorder for the county not later than five (5) days
              after the date of acceptance.

7.    Individuals who transfer from one Colorado county to another shall be provided the same
      opportunity to register to vote in the new county of residence. The new county of residence shall
      follow the above procedure. The new county of residence shall notify its county clerk and recorder
      of the client's change in address within five (5) days of receiving the information from the client.




                                                                                                             14
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                               10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


8.100.3.E.      Retroactive Medical Assistance Coverage

1.      An applicant for Medical Assistance shall be provided such assistance any time during the three
        months preceding the date of application, or as of the date the person became eligible for Medical
        Assistance, whichever is later. That person shall have received medical services at any time
        during that period and met all applicable eligibility requirements.

2.      An explanation of the conditions for retroactive Medical Assistance shall be given to all
        applicants. Those applicants who within the three months period prior to the date of application or
        as of the date the person became eligible for Medical Assistance, whichever is later, have
        received medical services which would be a benefit under the Colorado State Plan, can request
        retroactive coverage on the application form. The determination of eligibility for retroactive
        Medical Assistance shall be made as part of the application process. An applicant does not have
        to be eligible in the month of application to be eligible for retroactive Medical Assistance. The
        applicant or client may verbally request retroactive coverage at any time following the completion
        of an application. Verification required to determine Medical Assistance Program eligibility for the
        retroactive period shall be secured by the eligibility site to determine retroactive eligibility. Proof of
        the declared medical service shall not be required.

8.100.3.F.      Groups Assisted Under the Program

1.      The Medical Assistance Program provides benefits to the following persons who meet the federal
        definition of categorically needy at the time they apply for benefits:

        a.      Parents and Caretaker Relatives, Pregnant Women, Children, Adults, and Family
                Planning Medical Assistance as defined under the Modified Adjusted Gross Income
                (MAGI)Medical Assistance section 8.100.4.

        b.      Persons who meet legal immigrant requirements as outlined in this volume, who were or
                would have been eligible for SSI but for their alien status, if such persons meet the
                resource, income and disability requirements for SSI eligibility.

        c.      Persons who are receiving financial assistance; and who are eligible for a SISC Code of
                A or B. See section 8.100.3.M for more information on SISC Codes.

        d.      Persons who are eligible for financial assistance under Old Age Pension (OAP) and SSI,
                but are not receiving the money payment.

        e.      Persons who would be eligible for financial assistance from OAP or SSI, except for the
                receipt of Social Security Cost of Living Adjustment (COLA) increases, or other
                retirement, survivors, or disability benefit increases to their own or a spouse's income.
                This group also includes persons who lost OAP or SSI due to the receipt of Social
                Security Benefits and who would still be eligible for the Medical Assistance Program
                except for the cost of living adjustments (COLA's) received. These populations are
                referenced as Pickle and Disabled Widow(er)s.

        f.      Persons who are blind, disabled, or aged individuals residing in the medical institution or
                Long Term Care Institution whose income does not exceed 300% of SSI.

        g.      Persons who are blind, disabled or aged receiving HCBS whose income does not exceed
                300% of the SSI benefit level and who, except for the level of their income, would be
                eligible for an SSI payment.




                                                                                                               15
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                           10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


       h.      A disabled adult child who is at least 18 years of age and who was receiving SSI as a
               disabled child prior to the age of 22, and for whom SSI was discontinued on or after May
               1, 1987, due to having received of OASDI drawn from a parent(s) Social Security
               Number, and who would continue to be eligible for SSI if the above OASDI and all
               subsequent cost of living adjustments were disregarded. This population is referenced as
               Disabled Adult Child (DAC).

       i.      Children age 18 and under who would otherwise require institutionalization in an Long
               Term Care Institution, Nursing Facility (NF), or a hospital but for which it is appropriate to
               provide care outside of an institution as described in 1902(e)(3) of the Act Public Law No.
               97-248 (Section 134).

       j.      Persons receiving OAP-A, OAP-B, and OAP Refugees who do not meet SSI eligibility
               criteria but do meet the state eligibility criteria for the OAP State Only Medical Assistance
               Program. These persons qualify for a SISC Code C.

       k.      Persons who apply for and meet the criteria for one of the categorical Medical Assistance
               programs, but do not meet the criteria of citizenship shall receive Medical Assistance
               benefits for emergencies only.

       l.      Persons with a disability or limited disability who are at least 16, with income less than or
               equal to 450% of FPL after income disregards, regardless of resources, and who are
               employed.

       m.      Children with a disability who are age 18 and under, with household income less than or
               equal to 300% of FPL after income disregards, regardless of resources.

       n.      Effective March 2020 due to the Coronavirus COVID-19 Public Health Emergency, an
               applicant who is not eligible for Medical Assistance but has been impacted through
               exposure to or potential infection of COVID-19 may be eligible to receive services for
               COVID-19 testing, treatment, or care for complications related to COVID-19. To qualify
               for this limited benefit, the applicant must satisfy residency and immigration-or citizenship
               and not be enrolled in other health insurance. With the expiration of the Covid-19 Public
               Health Emergency declaration effective May 11, 2023 the limited COVID-19 benefit group
               will end. Federal financial participation (FFP) is not available for services after the last
               day of the PHE. The Department will use state-only funds to continue to provide
               coverage for individuals who were enrolled in the limited Covid-19 benefit group on May
               11, 2023 until May 31,2023. After May 11, 2023 individuals will no longer be enrolled in
               the limited Covid-19 benefit group.

8.100.3.G.     General and Citizenship Eligibility Requirements

1.     To be eligible to receive Medical Assistance, an eligible person shall:

       a.      Be a resident of Colorado;

       b.      Meet the following requirements while being an inmate, in-patient or resident of a public
               institution:

               i).     The following individuals, if eligible, may be enrolled for Medical Assistance

                       1.       Patients in a public medical institution

                       2.       Residents of a Long-Term Care Institution




                                                                                                          16
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                        10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


                    3.       Prior inmates who have been paroled

                    4.       Resident of a publicly operated community residence which serves no
                             more than 16 residents

                    5.       Individuals participating in community corrections programs or residents
                             in community corrections facilities (“halfway houses”) who have freedom
                             of movement and association which includes individuals who:

                             a)      are not precluded from working outside the facility in employment
                                     available to individuals who are not under justice system
                                     supervision;

                             b)      can use community resources (e.g., libraries, grocery stores,
                                     recreation, and education) at will;

                             c)      can seek health care treatment in the broader community to the
                                     same or similar extent as other Medicaid enrollees in the state;
                                     and/or

                             d)      are residing at their home, such as house arrest, or another
                                     location

            ii).    Inmates who are incarcerated in a correctional institution such as a city, county,
                    state or federal prison may be enrolled, if eligible, with benefits limited to an in-
                    patient stay of 24 hours or longer in a medical institution.

      c.    Not be a patient in an institution for tuberculosis or mental disease, unless the person is
            under 21 years of age or has attained 65 years of age and is eligible for the Medical
            Assistance Program and is receiving active treatment as an inpatient in a psychiatric
            facility eligible for Medical Assistance reimbursement. See section 8.100.4.H for special
            provisions extending Medical Assistance coverage for certain patients who attain age 21
            while receiving such inpatient psychiatric services;

      d.    Meet all financial eligibility requirements of the Medical Assistance Program for which
            application is being made;

      e.    Meet the definition of disability or blindness, when applicable. Those definitions appear in
            this volume at 8.100.1 under Definitions;

      f.    Meet all other requirements of the Medical Assistance Program for which application is
            being made; and

      g.    Fall into one of the following categories:

            i)      Be a citizen or national of the United States, the District of Columbia, Puerto
                    Rico, Guam, the Virgin Islands, the Northern Mariana Islands, American Samoa
                    or Swain’s Island; or

            ii)     Be a lawfully admitted non-citizen who entered the United States prior to August
                    22, 1996, or




                                                                                                        17
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                       10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


            iii)   Be a non-citizen who entered the United States on or after August 22, 1996 and
                   is applying for Medical Assistance benefits to begin no earlier than five years
                   after the non-citizen’s date of entry into the United States who falls into one of the
                   following categories:

                   1)      lawfully admitted for permanent residence under the Immigration and
                           Nationality Act (hereafter referred to as the “INA”);

                   2)      paroled into the United States for at least one year under 8 U.S.C. §
                           1182(d)(5); or

                   3)      granted conditional entry under section 203(a)(7) of the INA, as in effect
                           prior to April 1, 1980; or

                   4)      determined by the eligibility site, in accordance with guidelines issued by
                           the U.S. Attorney General, to be a spouse, child, parent of a child, or
                           child of a parent who, in circumstances specifically described in 8 U.S.C.
                           §1641(c), has been battered or subjected to extreme cruelty which
                           necessitates the provision of Medical Assistance (Medicaid); or

            iv)    Be a non-citizen who arrived in the United States on any date, who falls into one
                   of the following categories:

                   1)      lawfully residing in Colorado and is an honorably discharged military
                           veteran (also includes spouse, unremarried surviving spouse and
                           unmarried, dependent children), or

                   2)      lawfully residing in Colorado and is on active duty (excluding training) in
                           the U.S. Armed Forces (also includes spouse, unremarried surviving
                           spouse and unmarried, dependent children), or

                   3)      granted asylum under section 208 of the INA, or

                   4)      refugee under section 207 of the INA, or

                   5)      deportation withheld under section 243(h) (as in effect prior to
                           September 30, 1996) or section 241(b)(3) (as amended by P.L. 104-208)
                           of the INA, or

                   6)      Cuban or Haitian entrant, as defined in section 501(e) of the Refugee
                           Education Assistance Act of 1980, or

                   7)      an individual who (1) was born in Canada and possesses at least 50
                           percent American Indian blood, or is a member of an Indian tribe as
                           defined in 25 U.S.C. sec. 5304(e)(2016), or

                   8)      admitted to the U.S. as an Amerasian immigrant pursuant to section 584
                           of the Foreign Operations, Export Financing, and Related Programs
                           Appropriations Act of 1988 (as amended by P.L. 100-461), or

                   9)      lawfully admitted permanent resident who is a Hmong or Highland Lao
                           veteran of the Vietnam conflict, or




                                                                                                      18
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                     10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


                  10)     a victim of a severe form of trafficking in persons, as defined in section
                          103 of the Victims of Trafficking and Violence Protection Act of 2000,
                          Pub. L.106-386, as amended (22 U.S.C. § 7105(b) (2016)), or

                  11)     An alien who arrived in the United States on or after December 26, 2007
                          who is an Iraqi special immigrant under section 101(a)(27) of the INA, or

                  12)     An alien who arrived in the United States on or after December 26, 2007
                          who is an Afghan Special Immigrant under section 101(a)(27) of the INA,
                          or

                  13)     Compact of Free Association (COFA) migrants, including citizens of
                          Micronesia, the Marshall Islands, and Palau, pursuant to section 208 of
                          the Consolidated Appropriations Act of 2021 (in effect December 27,
                          2020).

            v)    The statutes listed at sections 8.100.3.G.1.g.iii.1-5 and at 8.100.3.G.1.g.iv.3-11
                  are incorporated herein by reference. No amendments or later editions are
                  incorporated. These regulations are available for public inspection at the
                  Colorado Department of Health Care Policy and Financing, 1570 Grant Street,
                  Denver, Colorado 80203-1714. Pursuant to C.R.S. 24-4-103(12.5)(b)(2016), the
                  agency shall provide certified copies of the material incorporated at cost upon
                  request or shall provide the requestor with information on how to obtain a
                  certified copy of the material incorporated by reference from the agency of the
                  United States, this state, another state, or the organization or association
                  originally issuing the code, standard, guideline or rule.

            vi)   Be a lawfully admitted non-citizen who is a pregnant women or a child under the
                  age of 19 years in the United States who falls into one of the categories listed in
                  8.100.3.G.1.g.iii or into one of the following categories listed below. These
                  individuals are exempt from the 5-year waiting period:

                  1)      granted temporary resident status in accordance with 8 U.S.C. 1160 or
                          1255a,or

                  2)      granted Temporary Protected Status (TPS) in accordance with 8 U.S.C
                          1254a and pending applicants for TPS granted employment
                          authorization,

                  3)      granted employment authorization under 8 CFR 274a.12(c),or

                  4)      Family Unity beneficiary in accordance with section 301 of Pub. L. 101-
                          649, as amended.

                  5)      Deferred Enforced Departure (DED), pursuant to a decision made by the
                          President,

                  6)      granted Deferred Action status (excluding Deferred Action for Childhood
                          Arrivals (DACA)) as described in the Secretary of Homeland Security’s
                          June 15,2012 memorandum,

                  7)      granted an administrative stay of removal under 8 CFR 241.6(2016), or

                  8)      Beneficiary of approved visa petition who has a pending application for
                          adjustment of status.




                                                                                                       19
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                     10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


                    9)      Pending an application for asylum under 8 U.S.C. 1158, or for
                            withholding of removal under 8 U.S.C. 1231, or under the Convention
                            Against Torture who-

                            a)      as been granted employment authorization; or

                            b)      Is under the age of 14 and has had an application pending for at
                                    least 180 days.

                    10)     granted withholding of removal under the Convention Against Torture,

                    11)     A child who has a pending application for Special Immigrant Juvenile
                            status under 8 U.S.C. 1101(a)(27)(J), or

                    12)     Citizens of Micronesia, the Marshall Islands, and Palau, or

                    13)     is lawfully present American Samoa under the immigration of laws of
                            American Samoa.

                    14)     A non-citizen in a valid nonimmigrant status, as defined in 8 U.S.C.
                            1101(a)(15) or under 8 U.S.C. 1101(a)(17), or

                    15)     A non-citizen who has been paroled into the United States for less than
                            one year under 8 U.S.C. § 1182(d)(5), except for an individual paroled
                            for prosecution, for deferred inspection or pending removal proceedings.

            vii)    Be an Afghan Humanitarian Parolee who falls into one of the following categories
                    listed below, as defined in Section 2502 of the Extending Government Funding
                    and Delivering Emergency Assistance Act of 2021 (HR 5305). These individuals
                    are exempt from the 5-year waiting period until March 31, 2023, or through the
                    termination of their parole period, whichever is later:

                    1)      paroled into the United States between July 31, 2021 - September 30,
                            2022; or

                    2)      paroled into the United States after September 30, 2022, and

                            a)      is the spouse or child of an individual in subparagraph 1 as
                                    defined under section 101(b) of the Immigration and Nationality
                                    Act (8 U.S.C. 4 1101(b)); or

                            b)      is the parent or legal guardian of an individual in subparagraph 1
                                    who is determined to be an unaccompanied child under 6
                                    U.S.C.279(g)(2).

            viii)   Exception: Criteria set forth at 8.100.3.G.1.g does not apply to persons who
                    apply for and meet the criteria for one of the specific Medical Assistance
                    programs:

                    1)      Persons who are under the age of 19, whose 19th birthday occurred in
                            the current month, who are pregnant, or who are within 12 months of the
                            beginning of their postpartum period shall not be excluded from the
                            following Medical Assistance Categories on the basis of immigration
                            status:




                                                                                                    20
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                    10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


                          a)      MAGI Children, MAGI Pregnant, Psych <21, Transitional Medical
                                  Assistance, 4 Month Extended Medical Assistance, MAGI
                                  Prenatal Presumptive Eligibility, MAGI Child Presumptive
                                  Eligibility

                          b)      Medical Buy-In Program for Working Adults with Disabilities
                                  (including with Home and Community Based Services), Medicaid
                                  Buy-In Program for Children with Disabilities, and Long-Term
                                  Care waivers except Program of All Inclusive Care for the Elderly
                                  (PACE)

                  2)      Persons requesting limited emergency medical care only and/or
                          reproductive care shall not be excluded on the basis of immigration
                          status.

                  For non-qualified non-citizens receiving Medical Assistance emergency only
                  benefits, the following medical conditions will be covered:

                  An emergency medical condition (including labor and delivery) which manifests
                  itself by acute symptoms of sufficient severity (including severe pain) such that
                  the absence of immediate medical attention could reasonably be expected to
                  result in:

                          a)      placing the patient's health in serious jeopardy;

                          b)      serious impairment of bodily function; or

                          c)      serious dysfunction of any bodily organ or part.

                  These persons need not select a primary care physician as they are eligible only
                  for emergency medical services and/or reproductive health care services
                  Applicants are not required to obtain a written statement by their physician for
                  their application to be complete and processed. For emergency care, a physician
                  must certify and declare the presence of an emergency medical condition when
                  services are provided and shall indicate that services were for a medical
                  emergency on the claim form. This will suffice as the physician statement for an
                  emergency medical condition when services were provided. Medical Assistance
                  coverage for emergency medical care only is limited to care and services that are
                  necessary to treat immediate emergency medical conditions. Coverage does not
                  include prenatal care or follow-up care. Medical Assistance benefits for
                  reproductive health care services are limited to care and services that provide
                  reproductive health and/or family planning services only. Once a member has
                  been determined eligible for either of these emergency and/or reproductive
                  health services, the member will not be required to submit a new application
                  before 12 months for any other emergency and/or reproductive health services.
                  Members will have the option to advise the Department, at any time, that they no
                  longer need the services. Members receiving emergency and/or limited
                  reproductive health services will receive a renewal at 12 months to redetermine
                  their eligibility.

                  3)      The rules on confidentiality indicated under CRS § 24-74-103 prevent the
                          Department or eligibility site from reporting to the USCIS persons who
                          have applied for or are receiving assistance.




                                                                                                      21
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                          10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


2.    For determinations of eligibility for Medical Assistance, legal immigration status must be verified.
      This requirement applies to a non-citizen individual who meets the criteria of any category defined
      at 8.100.3.G(1)(g)(ii) (iii) (iv)(vi) or (vii) and has declared that he or she has a legal immigration
      status.

      a.      The Verify Lawful Presence (VLP) interface will be used to verify immigration status. The
              VLP interface connects to the Systematic Alien Verification for Entitlements (SAVE)
              Program to verify legal immigration status.

              i)       If an automated response from VLP confirms that the information submitted is
                       consistent with VLP data for immigration status verification requirements, no
                       further action is required for the individual and no additional documentation of
                       immigration status is required.

              ii)      If the VLP cannot automatically confirm the information submitted, the individual
                       will be contacted with a request for additional documents and/or information
                       needed to verify their legal immigration status through the VLP interface. If a
                       response from the VLP interface confirms that the additional documents and/or
                       information received from the individual verifies their legal immigration status, no
                       further action is required for the individual and no additional documentation of
                       immigration status is required.

3.    Reasonable Opportunity Period

      a.      If the verification through the electronic interface is unsuccessful then the applicant will be
              provided a reasonable opportunity period, of 90 days, to submit documents indicating a
              legal immigration status, as listed in 8.100.3.G.1.g. The reasonable opportunity period will
              begin as of the date of the Notice of Action. The required documentation must be
              received within the reasonable opportunity period.

      b       If the applicant does not provide the necessary documents within the reasonable
              opportunity period, then the applicant’s Medical Assistance application shall be
              terminated.

      c.      The reasonable opportunity period applies to MAGI, Adult and Buy-In Programs.

              i)       For the purpose of this section only, MAGI Programs for persons covered
                       pursuant to 8.100.4.G or 8.100.4.I. include the following:

                        Commonly Used Program Name                                 Rule Citation
                        Children’s Medical Assistance                              8.100.4.G.2
                        Parent and Caretaker Relative Medical Assistance           8.100.4.G.3
                        Adult Medical Assistance                                   8.100.4.G.4
                        Pregnant Women Medical Assistance                          8.100.4.G.5
                        Legal Immigrant Prenatal Medical Assistance                8.100.4.G.6
                        Transitional Medical Assistance                            8.100.4.I.1-5




                                                                                                          22
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                          10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


               ii)     For the purpose of this section only, Adult and Buy-In Programs for persons
                       covered pursuant to 8.100.3.F, 8.100.6.P, 8.100.6.Q, or 8.715. include the
                       following:

                         Commonly Used Program Name                                        Rule Citation
                         Old Age Pension A (OAP-A)                                         8.100.3.F.1.c
                         Old Age Pension B (OAP-B)                                         8.100.3.F.1.c
                         Qualified Disabled Widow/Widower                                  8.100.3.F.1.e
                         Pickle                                                            8.100.3.F.1.e
                         Long-Term Care                                                    8.100.3.F.1.f-h
                         Medicaid Buy-In Program for Working Adults with Disabilities      8.100.6.P
                         Medicaid Buy-In Program for Children with Disabilities            8.100.6.Q
                         Breast and Cervical Cancer Program (BCCP)                         8.715

8.100.3.H.     Citizenship and Identity Documentation Requirements

1.     For determinations of initial eligibility and redeterminations of eligibility for Medical Assistance
       made on or after July 1, 2006, citizenship or nationality and identity status must be verified unless
       such satisfactory documentary evidence has already been provided, as described in
       8.100.3.H.4.b. This requirement applies to an individual who declares or who has previously
       declared that he or she is a citizen or national of the United States.

       a.      The following electronic interfaces shall be accepted as proof of citizenship and/or
               identity as listed and should be used prior to requesting documentary evidence from
               applicants/clients:

               i)      SSA Interface is an acceptable interface to verify citizenship and identity. An
                       automated response from SSA that confirms that the data submitted is consistent
                       with SSA data, including citizenship or nationality, meets citizenship and identity
                       verification requirements. No further action is required for the individual and no
                       additional documentation of either citizenship or identity is required.

               ii)     Department of Motor Vehicles (DMV) Interface is an acceptable interface to verify
                       identity. An automated response from DMV confirms that the data submitted is
                       consistent with DMV data for identity verification requirements. No further action
                       is required for the individual and no additional documentation of identity is
                       required.

       b.      This requirement does not apply to the following groups:

               i)      Individuals who are entitled to or who are enrolled in any part of Medicare.

               ii)     Individuals who receive Supplemental Security Income (SSI).

               iii)    Individuals who receive child welfare services under Title IV-B of the Social
                       Security Act on the basis of being a child in foster care.

               iv)     Individuals who receive adoption or foster care assistance under Title IV-E of the
                       Social Security Act.

               v)      Individuals who receive Social Security Disability Insurance (SSDI).




                                                                                                         23
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                           10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


              vi)     Children born to a woman who has applied for, has been determined eligible, and
                      is receiving Medical Assistance on the date of the child's birth, as described in
                      8.100.4.G.5. This includes instances where the labor and delivery services were
                      provided before the date of application and were covered by the Medical
                      Assistance Program as an emergency service based on retroactive eligibility.

                      1)       A child meeting the criteria described in 8.100.3.H.1.b.vi shall be deemed
                               to have provided satisfactory documentary evidence of citizenship or
                               nationality and shall not be required to provide further documentary
                               evidence at any time in the future, regardless of any subsequent
                               changes in the child’s eligibility for Medical Assistance.

                      2)       Special Provisions for Retroactive Reversal of a Previous Denial

                               a)      If a child described at 8.100.3.H.1.b.vi was previously
                                       determined to be ineligible for Medical Assistance solely for
                                       failure to meet the citizenship and identity documentation
                                       requirements, the denial shall be reversed. Eligibility shall be
                                       effective retroactively to the date of the child’s birth provided all
                                       of the following criteria are met:

                                       (1)     The child was determined to be ineligible for Medical
                                               Assistance during the period between July 1, 2006 and
                                               October 1, 2009 solely for failure to meet the citizenship
                                               and identity documentation requirements as they existed
                                               during that period;

                                       (2)     The child would have been determined to be eligible for
                                               Medical Assistance had 8.100.3.H.1.b.vi and/or
                                               8.100.3.H.1.b.vi.2.a been in effect during the period from
                                               July 1, 2006 through October 1, 2009; and

                                       (3)     The child’s parent, caretaker relative, or legally
                                               appointed guardian or conservator requests that the
                                               denial of eligibility for Medical Assistance be reversed.
                                               The request may be verbal or in writing.

                               b)      A child for whom denial of eligibility for Medical Assistance has
                                       been retroactively reversed shall be subject to the eligibility
                                       redetermination provisions described at 8.100.3.P.1. Such
                                       redetermination shall occur twelve months from the retroactive
                                       eligibility date determined when the denial was reversed
                                       pursuant to this subsection 1.

                               c)      A child granted retroactive eligibility for Medical Assistance shall
                                       be subject to the requirements described at 8.100.4.G.2. for
                                       continued eligibility.

              vii)    Individuals receiving Medical Assistance during a period of presumptive eligibility.

              viii)   Individuals qualifying for Medical Assistance under 8.100.3.G.g.viii.

2.    Satisfactory documentary evidence of citizenship or nationality includes the following:




                                                                                                           24
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                        10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


      a.    Stand-alone documents for evidence of citizenship and identity. The following evidence
            shall be accepted as satisfactory documentary evidence of both identity and citizenship:

            i)      A U.S. passport issued by the U.S. Department of State that:

                    1)      includes the applicant or recipient, and

                    2)      was issued without limitation. A passport issued with a limitation may be
                            used as proof of identity, as outlined in 8.100.3.H.3.

            ii)     A Certificate of Naturalization (DHS Forms N-550 or N-570) issued by the
                    Department of Homeland Security (DHS) for naturalized citizens.

            iii)    A Certificate of U.S. Citizenship (DHS Forms N-560 or N-561) issued by the
                    Department of Homeland Security for individuals who derive citizenship through
                    a parent.

            iv)     A document issued by a federally recognized Indian tribe, evidencing
                    membership or enrollment in, or affiliation with, such tribe (such as a tribal
                    enrollment card or certificate of degree of Indian blood).

                    1)      Special Provisions for Retroactive Reversal of a Previous Denial

                            a)       For a member of a federally recognized Indian tribe who was
                                     determined to be ineligible for Medical Assistance solely for
                                     failure to meet the citizenship and identity documentation
                                     requirements, the denial of eligibility shall be reversed and
                                     eligibility shall be effective as of the date on which the individual
                                     was determined to be ineligible provided all of the following
                                     criteria are met:

                                     (1)     The individual was determined to be ineligible for
                                             Medical Assistance on or after July 1, 2006 solely on the
                                             basis of not meeting the citizenship and identity
                                             documentation requirements as they existed during that
                                             period;

                                     (2)     The individual would have been determined to be eligible
                                             for Medical Assistance had 8.100.3.H.2.a.iv) been in
                                             effect on or after July 1, 2006; and

                                     (3)     The individual or a legally appointed guardian or
                                             conservator of the individual requests that the denial of
                                             eligibility for Medical Assistance be reversed. The
                                             request may be verbal or in writing.

                            b)       A member of a federally recognized Indian tribe for whom denial
                                     of eligibility for Medical Assistance has been retroactively
                                     reversed shall be subject to the eligibility redetermination
                                     provisions described at 8.100.3.P.1. Such redetermination shall
                                     occur twelve months from the retroactive eligibility date
                                     determined when the denial was reversed as provided in this
                                     subsection 2.




                                                                                                        25
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                       10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


      b.    Evidence of citizenship. If evidence from the list in 8.100.3.H.2.a. is not provided, an
            applicant or recipient shall provide satisfactory documentary evidence of citizenship from
            the list specified in this section to establish citizenship AND satisfactory documentary
            evidence from the documents listed in section 8.100.3.H. 3. to establish identity.
            Evidence of citizenship includes:

            i)      A U.S. public birth certificate.

                    1)      The birth certificate shall show birth in any one of the following:

                            a)       One of the 50 States,

                            b)       The District of Columbia,

                            c)       Puerto Rico (if born on or after January 13, 1941),

                            d)       Guam (if born on or after April 10, 1899),

                            e)       The Virgin Islands of the U.S. (if born on or after January 17,
                                     1917),

                            f)       American Samoa,

                            g)       Swain's Island, or

                            h)       The Northern Mariana Islands (NMI) (if born after November 4,
                                     1986 (NMI local time)).

                    2)      The birth record document shall have been issued by the State,
                            Commonwealth, Territory or local jurisdiction.

                    3)      The birth record document shall have been recorded before the person
                            was 5 years of age. A delayed birth record document that is recorded at
                            or after 5 years of age is considered fourth level evidence of citizenship,
                            as described in 8.100.3.H.2.d.

            ii)     A Certification of Report of Birth (DS-1350) issued by the U.S. Department of
                    State to U.S. citizens who were born outside the U.S. and acquired U.S.
                    citizenship at birth.

            iii)    A Report of Birth Abroad of a U.S. Citizen (Form FS-240) issued by the U.S.
                    Department of State consular office overseas for children under age 18 at the
                    time of issuance. Children born outside the U.S. to U.S. military personnel
                    usually have one of these.

            iv)     A Certification of birth issued by the U.S. Department of State (Form FS-545 or
                    DS-1350) before November 1,1990.

            v)      A U.S. Citizen I.D. card issued by the U.S. Immigration and Naturalization
                    Services (INS):

                    1)      Form I-179 issued from 1960 until 1973, or

                    2)      Form I-197 issued from 1973 until April 7, 1983.




                                                                                                       26
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                        10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


            vi)     A Northern Mariana Identification Card (I-873) issued by INS to a collectively
                    naturalized citizen of the U.S. who was born in the NMI before November 4,
                    1986.

            vii)    An American Indian Card (I-872) issued by the Department of Homeland Security
                    with the classification code “KIC.”

            viii)   A final adoption decree that:

                    1)      shows the child's name and U.S. place of birth, or

                    2)      a statement from a State approved adoption agency that shows the
                            child's name and U.S. place of birth. The adoption agency must state in
                            the certification that the source of the place of birth information is an
                            original birth certificate.

            ix)     Evidence of U.S. Civil Service employment before June 1, 1976. The document
                    shall show employment by the U.S. government before June 1, 1976.

            x)      U.S. Military Record that shows a U.S. place of birth such as a DD-214 or similar
                    official document showing a U.S. place of birth.

            xi)     Data verification with the Systematic Alien Verification for Entitlements (SAVE)
                    Program for naturalized citizens.

            xii)    Child Citizenship Act. Adopted or biological children born outside the United
                    States may establish citizenship obtained automatically under section 320 of the
                    Immigration and Nationality Act (8 USC § 1431), as amended by the Child
                    Citizenship Act of 2000 (Pub. L. 106-395, enacted on October 30, 2000). section
                    320 of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 USC § 1431), as amended by the
                    Child Citizenship Act of 2000 (Pub. L. 106-395, enacted on October 30, 2000) is
                    incorporated herein by reference. No amendments or later editions are
                    incorporated. Copies are available for inspections from the following person at
                    the following address: Custodian of Records, Colorado Department of Health
                    Care Policy and Financing, 1570 Grant Street, Denver, CO 80203-1818. Any
                    material that has been incorporated by reference in this rule may be examined at
                    any state publications repository library.

                    Documentary evidence must be provided at any time on or after February 27,
                    2001, if the following conditions have been met:

                    1)      At least one parent of the child is a United States citizen by either birth or
                            naturalization (as verified under the requirements of this part);

                    2)      The child is under the age of 18;

                    3)      The child is residing in the United States in the legal and physical
                            custody of the U.S. citizen parent;

                    4)      The child was admitted to the United States for lawful permanent
                            residence (as verified through the Systematic Alien Verification for
                            Entitlements (SAVE) Program); and




                                                                                                       27
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                      10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


                    5)      If adopted, the child satisfies the requirements of section 101(b)(1) of the
                            Immigration and Nationality Act (8 USC § 1101(b)(1)) pertaining to
                            international adoptions (admission for lawful permanent residence as IR-
                            3 (child adopted outside the United States), or as IR-4 (child coming to
                            the United States to be adopted) with final adoption having subsequently
                            occurred. 8 USC § 1101(b)(1) is incorporated herein by reference. No
                            amendments or later editions are incorporated. Copies are available for
                            inspections from the following person at the following address: Custodian
                            of Records, Colorado Department of Health Care Policy and Financing,
                            1570 Grant Street, Denver, CO 80203-1818. Any material that has been
                            incorporated by reference in this rule may be examined at any state
                            publications repository library.

            xiii)   Extract of a hospital record on hospital letterhead.

                    1)      The record shall have been established at the time of the person's birth;

                    2)      The record shall have been created at least 5 years before the initial
                            application date; and

                    3)      The record shall indicate a U.S. place of birth;

                    4)      For children under 16 the document shall have been created near the
                            time of birth or at least 5 years before the date of application.

                    5)      Souvenir “birth certificates” issued by a hospital are not acceptable.

            xiv)    Life, health, or other insurance record.

                    1)      The record shall show a U.S. place of birth; and

                    2)      The record shall have been created at least 5 years before the initial
                            application date.

                    3)      For children under 16 the document must have been created near the
                            time of birth or at least 5 years before the date of application.

            xv)     Religious record.

                    1)      The record shall have been recorded in the U.S. within 3 months of the
                            date of the individual's birth;

                    2)      The record shall show that the birth occurred in the U.S.;

                    3)      The record shall show either the date of birth or the individual's age at
                            the time the record was made; and

                    4)      The record shall be an official record recorded with the religious
                            organization.

            xvi)    Early school record that meets the following criteria:

                    1)      The school record shows the name of the child;

                    2)      The school record shows the child's date of admission to the school;




                                                                                                        28
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                            10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


                     3)      The school record shows the child's date of birth;

                     4)      The school record shows a U.S. place of birth for the child; and

                     5)      The school record shows the name(s) and place(s) of birth of the
                             applicant's parents.

            xvii)    Federal or State census record showing U.S. citizenship or a U.S. place of birth
                     and the applicant's age.

            xviii)   One of the following documents that shows a U.S. place of birth and was created
                     at least 5 years before the application for The Medical Assistance Program. For
                     children under 16 the document must have been created near the time of birth or
                     at least 5 years before the date of application.

                     1)      Seneca Indian tribal census record;

                     2)      Bureau of Indian Affairs tribal census records of the Navajo Indians;

                     3)      U.S. State Vital Statistics official notification of birth registration;

                     4)      A delayed U.S. public birth record that is recorded more than 5 years
                             after the person's birth;

                     5)      Statement signed by the physician or midwife who was in attendance at
                             the time of birth; or

                     6)      The Roll of Alaska Natives maintained by the Bureau of Indian Affairs.

            xix)     Institutional admission papers from a nursing facility, skilled care facility or other
                     institution created at least 5 years before the initial application date that indicate
                     a U.S. place of birth.

            xx)      Medical (clinic, doctor, or hospital) record.

                     1)      The record shall have been created at least 5 years before the initial
                             application date; and

                     2)      The record shall indicate a U.S. place of birth.

                     3)      An immunization record is not considered a medical record for purposes
                             of establishing U.S. citizenship.

                     4)      For children under 16 the document shall have been created near the
                             time of birth or at least 5 years before the date of application.

            xxi)     Written affidavit. Affidavits shall only be used in rare circumstances. They may be
                     used by U.S. citizens or nationals born inside or outside the U.S. If
                     documentation is by affidavit, the following rules apply:

                     1)      There shall be at least two affidavits by two individuals who have
                             personal knowledge of the event(s) establishing the applicant's or
                             recipient's claim of citizenship (the two affidavits could be combined in a
                             joint affidavit);




                                                                                                          29
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                       10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


                    2)      At least one of the individuals making the affidavit cannot be related to
                            the applicant or recipient. Neither of the two individuals can be the
                            applicant or recipient;

                    3)      In order for the affidavit to be acceptable the persons making them shall
                            provide proof of their own U.S. citizenship and identity.

                    4)      If the individual(s) making the affidavit has (have) information which
                            explains why documentary evidence establishing the applicant's claim of
                            citizenship does not exist or cannot be readily obtained, the affidavit shall
                            contain this information as well;

                    5)      The applicant/recipient or other knowledgeable individual (guardian or
                            representative) shall provide a separate affidavit explaining why the
                            evidence does not exist or cannot be obtained; and

                    6)      The affidavits shall be signed under penalty of perjury pursuant to 18
                            U.S.C. §1641 and Title 18 of the Criminal Code article 8 part 5 and need
                            not be notarized.

      c.    Evidence of citizenship for collectively naturalized individuals. If a document shows the
            individual was born in Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands of the U.S., or the Northern Mariana
            Islands before these areas became part of the U.S., the individual may be a collectively
            naturalized citizen. A second document from 8.100.3.H.3. to establish identity shall also
            be presented.

            i)      Puerto Rico:

                    1)      Evidence of birth in Puerto Rico on or after April 11, 1899 and the
                            applicant's statement that he or she was residing in the U.S., a U.S.
                            possession or Puerto Rico on January 13, 1941; OR

                    2)      Evidence that the applicant was a Puerto Rican citizen and the
                            applicant's statement that he or she was residing in Puerto Rico on
                            March 1, 1917 and that he or she did not take an oath of allegiance to
                            Spain.

            ii)     US Virgin Islands:

                    1)      Evidence of birth in the U.S. Virgin Islands, and the applicant's statement
                            of residence in the U.S., a U.S. possession or the U.S. Virgin Islands on
                            February 25, 1927; OR

                    2)      The applicant's statement indicating residence in the U.S. Virgin Islands
                            as a Danish citizen on January 17, 1917 and residence in the U.S., a
                            U.S. possession or the U.S. Virgin Islands on February 25, 1927, and
                            that he or she did not make a declaration to maintain Danish citizenship;
                            OR

                    3)      Evidence of birth in the U.S. Virgin Islands and the applicant's statement
                            indicating residence in the U.S., a U.S. possession or Territory or the
                            Canal Zone on June 28, 1932.

            iii)    Northern Mariana Islands (NMI) (formerly part of the Trust Territory of the Pacific
                    Islands (TTPI)):




                                                                                                        30
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                       10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


                     1)       Evidence of birth in the NMI, TTPI citizenship and residence in the NMI,
                              the U.S., or a U.S. Territory or possession on November 3, 1986 (NMI
                              local time) and the applicant's statement that he or she did not owe
                              allegiance to a foreign state on November 4, 1986 (NMI local time); OR

                     2)       Evidence of TTPI citizenship, continuous residence in the NMI since
                              before November 3, 1981 (NMI local time), voter registration prior to
                              January 1, 1975 and the applicant's statement that he or she did not owe
                              allegiance to a foreign state on November 4, 1986 (NMI local time); OR

                     3)       Evidence of continuous domicile in the NMI since before January 1, 1974
                              and the applicant's statement that he or she did not owe allegiance to a
                              foreign state on November 4, 1986 (NMI local time).

                     4)       If a person entered the NMI as a nonimmigrant and lived in the NMI
                              since January 1, 1974, this does not constitute continuous domicile, and
                              the individual is not a U.S. citizen.

      d)     Referrals for Colorado Birth Certificates

             i)      An applicant or client who was born in the State of Colorado who does not
                     possess a Colorado birth certificate shall receive a referral to the Department of
                     Public Health and Environment by the county department to obtain a birth
                     certificate at no charge, pursuant to C.R.S. § 25-2-117(2)(a)(I)(C).

             ii)     The referral shall be provided on county department letterhead and shall include
                     the following:

                     1)       The name and address of the applicant or client;

                     2)       A statement that the county department requests that the Department of
                              Public Health and Environment waive the birth certificate fee, pursuant to
                              C.R.S. § 25-2-117(2)(a)(I)(C); and

                     3)       The name and contact telephone number for the county caseworker
                              responsible for the referral.

             iii)    An applicant or client who has been referred to the Department of Public Health
                     and Environment to obtain a birth certificate shall not be required to present a
                     birth certificate to satisfy the citizenship documentation requirement at
                     8.100.3.H.2. The applicant or client shall have the right to use any of the
                     documents listed under 8.100.3.H.2. to satisfy the citizenship documentation
                     requirement.

3.    The following documents shall be accepted as proof of identity and shall accompany a document
      establishing citizenship from the groups of documentary evidence outlined in 8.100.3.H.2.b.
      through d.

      a)     A driver's license issued by a State or Territory either with a photograph of the individual
             or other identifying information such as name, age, sex, race, height, weight, or eye color;

      b)     School identification card with a photograph of the individual;

      c)     U.S. military card or draft record;




                                                                                                      31
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                           10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


      d)    Identification card issued by the Federal, State, or local government with the same
            information included on driver's licenses;

      e)    Military dependent's identification card;

      f)    U.S. Coast Guard Merchant Mariner card;

      g)    Certificate of Degree of Indian Blood, or other U.S. American Indian/Alaska Native Tribal
            document with a photograph or other personal identifying information relating to the
            individual. The document is acceptable if it carries a photograph of the individual or has
            other personal identifying information relating to the individual such as age, weight,
            height, race, sex, and eye color; or

      h)    Three or more documents that together reasonably corroborate the identity of an
            individual provided such documents have not been used to establish the individual's
            citizenship and the individual submitted evidence of citizenship listed under
            8.100.3.H.2.b. or 8.100.3.H.2.c. The following requirements must be met:

            i)      No other evidence of identity is available to the individual;

            ii)     The documents must at a minimum contain the individual's name, plus any
                    additional information establishing the individual's identity; and

            iii)    All documents used must contain consistent identifying information.

            iv)     These documents include, but are not limited to, employer identification cards,
                    high school and college diplomas from accredited institutions (including general
                    education and high school equivalency diplomas), marriage certificates, divorce
                    decrees, and property deeds/titles.

      i)    Special identity rules for children. For children under 16, the following records are
            acceptable:

            i)      Clinic, doctor, or hospital records; or

            ii)     School records.

                    1)       The school record may include nursery or daycare records and report
                             cards; and

                    2)       The school, nursery, or daycare record must be verified with the issuing
                             school, nursery, or daycare.

                    3)       If clinic, doctor, hospital, or school records are not available, an affidavit
                             may be used if it meets the following requirements:

                             a)       It shall be signed under penalty of perjury by a parent or
                                      guardian;

                             b)       It shall state the date and place of birth of the child; and

                             c)       It cannot be used if an affidavit for citizenship was provided.

                             d)       The affidavit is not required to be notarized.




                                                                                                          32
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                             10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


                               e)       An affidavit may be accepted on behalf of a child under the age
                                        of 18 in instances when school ID cards and drivers' licenses are
                                        not available to the individual until that age.

      j)     Special identity rules for disabled individuals in institutional care facilities.

             i)       An affidavit may be used for disabled individuals in institutional care facilities if
                      the following requirements are met:

                      1)       It shall be signed under penalty of perjury by a residential care facility
                               director or administrator on behalf of an institutionalized individual in the
                               facility; and

                      2)       No other evidence of identity is available to the individual.

                      3)       The affidavit is not required to be notarized.

      k)     Expired identity documents.

             i)       Identity documents do not need to be current to be acceptable. An expired
                      identity document shall be accepted as long as there is no reason to believe that
                      the document does not match the individual.

      l)     Referrals for Colorado Identification Cards

             i)       An applicant or client who does not possess a Colorado driver’s license or
                      identification card shall be referred to the Department of Revenue Division of
                      Motor Vehicles by the county department to obtain an identification card at no
                      charge, pursuant to C.R.S. § 42-2-306(1)(a)(II).

             ii)      The referral shall be provided on county department letterhead and shall include
                      the following:

                      1)       The name and address of the applicant or client;

                      2)       A statement that the county department requests that the Department of
                               Revenue Division of Motor Vehicles waive the identification card fee,
                               pursuant to C.R.S § 42-2-306(1)(a)(II).; and

                      3)       The name and contact telephone number for the county caseworker
                               responsible for the referral.

             iii)     An applicant or client who has been referred to the Division of Motor Vehicles to
                      obtain an identification card shall not be required to present a Colorado
                      identification card to satisfy the identity documentation requirement at
                      8.100.3.H.3. The applicant or client shall have the right to use any of the
                      documents listed under 8.100.3.H.3. to satisfy the identity documentation
                      requirement.

4.    Documentation Requirements

      a.     Citizenship and identity documents may be submitted as originals, certified copies,
             photocopies, facsimiles, scans or other copies.




                                                                                                              33
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                      10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


      b.    Individuals who submitted notarized copies of citizenship and identity documents as part
            of an application or redetermination before January 1, 2008 shall not be required to
            submit originals or copies certified by the issuing agency for any application or
            redetermination processed on or after January 1, 2008.

      c.    All citizenship and identity documents shall be presumed to be genuine unless the
            authenticity of the document is questionable.

      d.    Individuals shall not be required to submit citizenship and identity documentation in
            person. Documents shall be accepted from a Medical Assistance applicant or client or
            from his or her guardian or authorized representative in person or by mail.

            i)      Individuals are strongly encouraged to use alternatives to mailing original
                    documents to counties, such as those described in 8.100.3.H.4.e.

      e.    Individuals may present original citizenship and identity documents or copies certified by
            the issuing agency to Medical Assistance (MA) sites, School-based Medical Assistance
            sites, Presumptive Eligibility (PE) sites, Federally Qualified Health Centers (FQHCs),
            Disproportionate Share Hospitals (DSHs), or any other location designated by the
            Department by published agency letter.

            i)      Staff at these locations shall make a copy of the original documents and shall
                    complete a “Citizenship and Identity Documentation Received” form, stamp the
                    copy, or provide other verification that identifies that the documents presented
                    were originals. The verification shall include the name, telephone number,
                    organization name and address, and signature of the individual who reviewed the
                    document(s). This form, stamp, or other verification shall be attached to or
                    directly applied to the copy.

            ii)     Upon request by the client or eligibility site, the copy of the original document
                    with the “Citizenship and Identity Documentation Received” form, stamp, or other
                    verification as described in 8.100.3.H.4.e. i) shall be mailed or delivered directly
                    to the eligibility site within five business days.

      f.    Counties shall accept photocopies of citizenship and identity documents from any
            location described in 8.100.3.H.4.e provided the photocopies include the form, stamp, or
            verification described in 8.100.3.H.4.e.i).

      g.    Counties shall develop procedures for handling original citizenship and identity
            documents to ensure that these documents are not lost, damaged, or destroyed.

            i)      Upon receiving the original documents, eligibility site staff shall make a copy of
                    the original documents and shall complete a “Citizenship and Identity
                    Documentation Received” form, stamp the copy, or provide other verification that
                    identifies that the documents presented were originals, as described in
                    8.100.3.H.4.e. i). This form, stamp, or other verification shall be attached to or
                    directly applied to the copy.

            ii)     The original documents shall be sent by mail or returned to the individual in
                    person within five business days of the date on which they were received.

            iii)    To limit the risk of original documents being lost, damaged, or destroyed,
                    counties are strongly encouraged to make copies of documents immediately
                    upon receipt and to return original documents to the individual while he or she is
                    present.




                                                                                                      34
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                           10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


      h.      Once an individual has provided the required citizenship and identity documentation, he
              or she shall not be required to submit the documentation again unless:

              i)      Later evidence raises a question about the individual's citizenship or identity; or

              ii)     There is a gap of more than five years between the ending date of the individual's
                      last period of eligibility and a subsequent application for The Medical Assistance
                      Program and the eligibility site has not retained the citizenship and identity
                      documentation the individual previously provided.

5.    Record Retention Requirements

      a.      The eligibility site shall retain a paper or electronically scanned copy of an individual's
              citizenship and identity documentation, including any verification described in
              8.100.3.H.4.e.i), for at least five years from the ending date of the individual's last period
              of Medical Assistance eligibility.

6.    Name Change Provisions

      a.      An individual who has changed his or her last name for reasons including, but not limited
              to, marriage, divorce, or court order shall not be required to produce any additional
              documentation concerning the name change unless:

              i)      With the exception of the last name, the personal information in the citizenship
                      and identity documentation provided by the individual does not match in every
                      way;

              ii)     In addition to changing his or her last name, the individual also changed his or
                      her first name and/or middle name; or

              iii)    There is a reasonable basis for questioning whether the citizenship and identity
                      documents belong to the same individual.

7.    Reasonable Level of Assistance

      a.      The eligibility site shall provide a reasonable level of assistance to applicants and clients
              in obtaining the required citizenship and identity documentation.

      b.      Examples of a reasonable level of assistance include, but are not limited to:

              i)      Providing contact information for the appropriate agencies that issue the required
                      documents;

              ii)     Explaining the documentation requirements and how the client or applicant may
                      provide the documentation; or

              iii)    Referring the applicant or client to other agencies or organizations which may be
                      able to provide further assistance.

      c.      The eligibility site shall not be required to pay for the cost of obtaining required
              documentation.

8.    Individuals Requiring Additional Assistance




                                                                                                           35
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                            10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


      a.      The eligibility site shall provide additional assistance beyond the level described in
              8.100.3.H.7 to applicants and clients in obtaining the required citizenship and identity
              documentation if the client or applicant:

              i)      Is unable to comply with the requirements due to physical or mental impairments
                      or homelessness; and

              ii)     The individual lacks a guardian or representative who can provide assistance.

      b.      Examples of additional assistance include, but are not limited to:

              i)      Contacting any known family members who may have the required
                      documentation;

              ii)     Contacting any known current or past health care providers who may have the
                      required documentation; or

              iii)    Contacting other social services agencies that are known to have provided
                      assistance to the individual.

      c.      The eligibility site shall document its efforts to provide additional assistance to the client
              or applicant. Such documentation shall be subject to the record retention requirements
              described in 8.100.3.H.5.a.

9.    Reasonable Opportunity Period

      a.      If a Medical Assistance applicant does not have the required documentation, he or she
              must be given a reasonable opportunity period to provide the required documentation.
              The reasonable opportunity period will begin as of the date of the Notice of Action. The
              required documentation must be received within the reasonable opportunity period. If the
              applicant does not provide the required documentation within the reasonable opportunity
              period, then the applicant's Medical Assistance benefits shall not be terminated during
              the federal Coronavirus COVID-19 Public Health Emergency. Required documentation
              will be requested during the federal Coronavirus COVID-19 Public Health Emergency.
              When the federal COVID-19 Public Health Emergency has ended, a reasonable
              opportunity period will be given to request proper documentation from the member.

              i)      During the federal Coronavirus COVID-19 Public Health Emergency the
                      Department will continue eligibility for all Medical Assistance categories,
                      regardless of requested documentation and/or reported change for these
                      individuals to ensure continuity of eligibility for Medical Assistance coverage.

      Effective May 11, 2023 the Public Health Emergency declaration has ended and continuous
      coverage for individuals who have not provided required documentation by their renewal date will
      be terminated.

      b.      The reasonable opportunity period is 90 calendar days if unable to verify proof of
              citizenship/identity and applies to MAGI, Adult, and Buy-In Programs:




                                                                                                           36
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                           10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


              i)      For the purpose of this section only, MAGI Programs for persons covered
                      pursuant to 8.100.4.G or 8.100.4.I, include the following:

                          Commonly Used Program Name                                 Rule Citation
                          Children’s Medical Assistance                              8.100.4.G.2
                          Parent and Caretaker Relative Medical Assistance           8.100.4.G.3
                          Adult Medical Assistance                                   8.100.4.G.4
                          Pregnant Women Medical Assistance                          8.100.4.G.5
                          Transitional Medical Assistance                            8.100.4.I.1-5

              ii)     For the purpose of this section only, Adult and Buy-In Programs for persons
                      covered pursuant to 8.100.3.F, 8.100.6.P, 8.100.6.Q, or 8.715 include the
                      following:

                          Commonly Used Program Name                                 Rule Citation
                          Old Age Pension A (OAP-A)                                  8.100.3.F.1.c
                          Old Age Pension B (OAP-B)                                  8.100.3.F.1.c
                          Qualified Disabled Widow/Widower                           8.100.3.F.1.e
                          Pickle                                                     8.100.3.F.1.e
                          Long-Term Care                                             8.100.3.F.1.f-h
                          Medicaid Buy-In Program for Working Adults with            8.100.6.P
                          Disabilities
                          Medicaid Buy-In Program for Children with                  8.100.6.Q
                          Disabilities
                          Breast and Cervical Cancer Program (BCCP)                  8.715

10.   Good Faith Effort

      a.      In some cases, a Medical Assistance client or applicant may not be able to obtain the
              required documentation within the applicable reasonable opportunity period. If the client
              or applicant is making a good faith effort to obtain the required documentation, then the
              reasonable opportunity period should be extended. The amount of time given should be
              determined on a case-by-case basis and should be based on the amount of time the
              individual needs to obtain the required documentation.

              Examples of good faith effort include, but are not limited to:

              i)      Providing verbal or written statements describing the individual’s effort at
                      obtaining the required documentation;

              ii)     Providing copies of emails, letters, applications, checks, receipts, or other
                      materials sent or received in connection with a request for documentation; or

              iii)    Providing verbal or written statements of the individuals’ efforts at identifying
                      people who could attest to the individual’s citizenship or identity, if citizenship
                      and/or identity are included in missing documentation.

              An individual’s verbal statement describing his or her efforts at securing the required
              documentation should be accepted without further verification unless the accuracy or
              truthfulness of the statement is questionable. The individual’s good faith efforts should be
              documented in the case file and are subject to all record retention requirements.




                                                                                                            37
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                            10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


8.100.3.I.      Additional General Eligibility Requirements

1.      Each person for whom Medical Assistance is being requested shall furnish a Social Security
        Number (SSN); or, if one has not been issued or is unknown, shall apply for the number and
        submit verification of the application, unless an exception below applies. The application for an
        SSN shall be documented in the case record by the eligibility site. Upon receipt of the assigned
        SSN, the client shall provide the number to the eligibility site. This requirement does not apply to
        those individuals who are not requesting Medical Assistance yet appear on the application, nor
        does it apply to individuals applying for emergency medical services, limited reproductive health
        services, or eligible newborns born to a Medical Assistance eligible mother.

        a.      An applicant's or client's refusal to furnish or apply for a Social Security Number affects
                the family's eligibility for assistance as follows:

                i)      that person cannot be determined eligible for the Medical Assistance Program;
                        and/or

                ii)     if the person with no SSN or proof of application for SSN is the only dependent
                        child on whose behalf assistance is requested or received, assistance shall be
                        denied or terminated.

        b.      Exception: An individual who qualifies for any of the following exceptions must not be
                required to provide an SSN:

                i.)     The individual is not eligible to receive an SSN; or

                ii)     The individual does not have an SSN and may only be issued an SSN for a valid
                        non-work reason in accordance with 20 CFR 422.104; or

                iii)    The individual refuses to obtain an SSN because of a well-established religious
                        objection.

        c.      Due to the COVID-19 Public Health Emergency, the Department will accept self-
                attestations for SSN verification. At the end of the COVID-19 Public Health Emergency,
                verification for eligibility criteria will be required as specified prior to the public health
                emergency. Effective May 11, 2023 the Coronavirus COVID-19 Public Health Emergency
                has been declared to end.

2.      A person who is applying for or receiving Medical Assistance shall assign to the State all rights
        against any other person (including but not limited to the sponsor of an alien) for medical support
        or payments for medical expenses paid on the applicant's or client's behalf or on the behalf of any
        other person for whom application is made or assistance is received.

        All appropriate clients of the Medical Assistance Program shall have the option to be referred for
        child support enforcement services using the form as specified by the Department.

3.      A person who is applying for or receiving Medical Assistance shall provide information regarding
        any third party resources available to any member of the assistance unit. Third party resources
        are any health coverage or insurance other than the Medical Assistance Program. A client’s
        refusal to supply information regarding third party resources may result in loss of Medical
        Assistance Program eligibility.




                                                                                                              38
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                            10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


4.     A person who is eligible for Medical Assistance shall be free to choose any qualified and
       approved participating institution, agency, or person offering care and services which are benefits
       of the program unless that person is enrolled in a managed care program operating under
       Federal waiver authority.

8.100.3.J.     Supplemental Security Income (SSI) And Aid To The Needy Disabled (AND)
        Recipients

1.     Persons who may be eligible for benefits under either MAGI Medical Assistance or SSI:

       a.      shall be advised of the benefits available under each program;

       b.      may apply for a determination of eligibility under either or both programs;

       c.      have the option to receive benefits under the program of their choice, but may not receive
               benefits under both programs at the same time; and

       d.      may change their selection if their circumstances change or if they decide later that it
               would be more advantageous to receive benefits from the other program.

2.     Any family member who is receiving financial assistance from SSI or OAP-A is not considered a
       member of the Medical Assistance required household, is not counted as a member of the
       household, and the individual's income and resources are disregarded in making the
       determination of need for Medical Assistance.

       a.      Exception: For MAGI Medical Assistance a family member who is receiving SSI, when
               appropriate can be counted as a member of the household and their income when
               appropriate can be considered in making the determination of eligibility for MAGI Medical
               Assistance. For treatment of income and household construction for MAGI Medical
               Assistance cases, see section 8.100.4.

3.     An individual receiving Aid to the Needy Disabled (AND) may also receive MAGI Medical
       Assistance, if the recipient meets the eligibility requirements for MAGI Medical Assistance. For
       these individuals, eligibility sites shall not include the applicant’s AND payment when calculating
       income to determine the household’s financial eligibility for MAGI Medical Assistance.

8.100.3.K.     Consideration of Income

1.     Income or resources of an alien sponsor or an alien sponsor’s spouse shall be countable to the
       sponsored alien effective December 19, 1997. Forms used prior to December 19, 1997, including
       but not limited to forms I-134 or I-136 are legally unenforceable affidavits of support. The
       attribution of the income and resources of the sponsor and the sponsor's spouse to the alien will
       continue until the alien becomes a U.S. citizen or has worked or can be credited with 40
       qualifying quarters of work, provided that an alien crediting the quarters to the applicant/client has
       not received any public benefit during any creditable quarter for any period after December 31,
       1996.

       a.      Exception: When the sponsored alien is a pregnant woman or a child the income or
               resources of an alien sponsor or an alien sponsor’s spouse will not be countable to the
               sponsored alien.

2.     Income, in general, is the receipt by an individual of a gain or benefit in cash or in kind during a
       calendar month. Income means any cash, payments, wages, in-kind receipt, inheritance, gift,
       prize, rents, dividends, interest, etc., that are received by an individual or family.




                                                                                                              39
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                           10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


3.    Earned income is payment in cash or in kind for services performed as an employee or from self-
      employment.

4.    Earned in kind income shall be income produced as a result of the performance of services by the
      applicant/client, for which he/she is compensated in shelter or other items in lieu of wages.

5.    Received means “actually” received or legally becomes available, whichever occurs first; the
      point at which the income first is available to the individual for use. For example, interest income
      on a savings account is counted when it is credited to the account.

6.    All Home Care Allowance (HCA) income paid to a Medical Assistance applicant or member by
      the HCA recipient to provide home care services is countable earned income.

7.    An applicant or member who is a live-In home care provider to a care recipient receiving a
      Difficulty of Care Payment and who is being determined for a MAGI Medical Assistance program,
      must meet the following requirements for Difficulty of Care payments to be excluded as countable
      income:

      a.      The care provider receiving payments for personal care or supportive services provided
              to a care recipient must live full-time in the same home with the care recipient; and

      b.      The care recipient must either

              i)       receiving personal care or supportive services must be enrolled in Long Term
                       Service Supports (LTSS), with additional services through a Home-Based
                       Services (HCBS) waiver program; or

              ii)      The care recipient must be enrolled in the Buy-In Program for Working Adults
                       with Disabilities, and receive additional services through the Home and
                       Community Based Services (HCBS) waiver program.

      c.      Exception: Difficulty of Care Payments are not excluded if the payments are for more
              than 10 qualified foster individuals under the age of 19 or 5 qualified foster individuals
              who are over the age of 19

8.    Participation in the Workforce Investment Act (WIA) affects eligibility for Medical Assistance as
      follows:

      a.      Wages derived from participation in a program carried out under WIA (work experience or
              on-the-job training) and paid to a caretaker relative is considered countable earned
              income.

      b.      Training allowances granted by WIA to a dependent child or a caretaker relative of a
              dependent child to participate in a training program is exempt.

      c.      Wages derived from participation in a program carried out the under Workforce
              Investment Act (WIA) and paid to any dependent child who is applying for or receiving
              Medical Assistance are exempt in determining eligibility for a period not to exceed six
              months in each calendar year.

9.    An individual involved in a profit-making activity as a sole proprietor, partner in a partnership,
      independent contractor, or consultant shall be classified as self-employed.

      a.      To determine the net profit of a self-employed applicant/client deduct the cost of doing
              business from the gross income. These business expenses include, but are not limited to:




                                                                                                           40
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                          10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


              i)      the rent of business premises,

              ii)     wholesale cost of merchandise,

              iii)    utilities,

              iv)     taxes,

              v)      labor, and

              vi)     upkeep of necessary equipment.

      b.      The following are not allowed as business expenses:

              i)      Depreciation of equipment;

                      1)           Exception: For the purpose of calculating MAGI-based income,
                                   depreciation of equipment is an allowable business expense if the
                                   equipment is not used for capital improvements.

              ii)     The cost of and payment on the principal of loans for capital asset or durable
                      goods;

              iii)    Personal expenses such as personal income tax payments, lunches, and
                      transportation to and from work.

      c.      Appropriate allowances for cost of doing business for Medical Assistance clients who are
              licensed, certified or approved day care providers are (1) $ 55 for the first child for whom
              day care is provided, and (2) $ 22 for each additional child. If the client can document a
              cost of doing business which is greater than the amounts above set forth, the procedure
              described in A, shall be used.

      d.      When determining self-employment expenses and distinguishing personal expenses from
              business expenses it is a requirement to only allow the percentage of the expense that is
              business related.

10.   Self-employment income includes, but is not limited to, the following:

      a.      Farm income - shall be considered as income in the month it is received. When an
              individual ceases to farm the land, the self-employment deductions are no longer
              allowable.

      b.      Rental income - shall be considered as self-employment income only if the Medical
              Assistance client actively manages the property at least an average of 20 hours per
              week.

      c.      Board (to provide a person with regular meals only) payment shall be considered earned
              income in the month received to the extent that the board payment exceeds the
              maximum food stamp allotment for one-person household per boarder and other
              documentable expenses directly related to the provision of board.

      d.      Room (to provide a person with lodging only) payments shall be considered earned
              income in the month received to the extent that the room payment exceeds
              documentable expenses directly related to the provision of the room.




                                                                                                        41
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                          10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


       e.      Room and board payments shall be considered earned income in the month received to
               the extent that the payment for room and board exceeds the food stamp allotment for a
               one-person household per room and boarder and documentable expenses directly
               related to the provision of room and board.

11.    Unearned income is the gross amount received in cash or kind that is not earned from
       employment or self-employment. Unearned income includes, but is not limited to, the following:

       a.      Pensions and other period payments, such as:

               i)      Private pensions or disability benefits

                       1)      Exception: Refer to section 8.100.4 for treatment of private disability
                               benefits for MAGI Medical Assistance.

               ii)     Social Security benefits (Retirement, survivors, and disability)

               iii)    Workers' Compensation payments

               iv)     Railroad retirement annuities

               v)      Unemployment insurance payments

               vi)     Veterans benefits other than Aid and Attendance (A&A) and Unusual Medical
                       Expenses (UME).

               vii)    Alimony and support payments

               viii)   Interest, dividends and certain royalties on countable resources

12.    For all Medical Assistance categories, the federal Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security
       (CARES) Act and American Rescue Plan (ARP) Act Recovery Rebate, known as the COVID-19
       Economic Stimulus, shall be exempt from consideration as income.

13.    Federal Pandemic Unemployment Compensation (FPUC) program, which provides an extra
       $600.00 a week for qualifying individuals, is exempt as countable unearned income for all Medical
       Assistance categories.

14.    Federal Income Tax refunds, Earned Income Tax Credit payments, or Child Tax Credits, are
       exempt from consideration as income.

8.100.3.L      Consideration of Resources

Consideration of Resources

1.     Resources are counted in determining eligibility for the Aged, Blind and Disabled, and Long-Term
       Care institutionalized and Home and Community Based Services categories of Medical
       Assistance. Resources are not counted in determining eligibility for the MAGI Medical Assistance
       programs, the Medicaid Buy-in Program for Working Adults with Disabilities, or the Medicaid Buy-
       In Program for Children with Disabilities, See section 8.100.5 for rules regarding consideration of
       resources.




                                                                                                         42
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                          10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


2.     The federal Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES) Act and American Rescue
       Plan (ARP) Act Recovery Rebate known as COVID-19 Economic Stimulus, shall be an exempt
       resource for the first 12 months following the receipt of the Recovery Rebate, after which the
       remaining balance will be considered a countable resource for all Medical Assistance categories
       which include an asset test.

8.100.3.M.     Federal Financial Participation (FFP)

1.     The state is entitled to claim federal financial participation (FFP) for benefits paid on behalf of
       groups covered under the Colorado Medical Assistance Program and also for the Medicare
       supplementary medical insurance benefits (SMIB) premium payments made on behalf of certain
       groups of categorically needy persons.

2.     The SISC codes are as follows:

       a.      Code A - for institutionalized persons whose income is under 300% of the SSI benefit
               level and who, except for the level of their income, would be eligible for an SSI payment;
               and non-institutionalized persons receiving Home and Community Based Services,
               whose income does not exceed 300% of the SSI benefit level and who, except for the
               level of their income, would be eligible for an SSI payment; code A signifies that FFP is
               available in expenditures for medical care and services which are benefits of the Medical
               Assistance program but not for SMIB premium payments;

       b.      Code B - for persons eligible to receive financial assistance under SSI; persons eligible to
               receive financial assistance under OAP “A” who, except for the level of their income,
               would be eligible for an SSI payment; persons who are receiving mandatory State
               supplementary payments; and persons who continue to be eligible for Medical Assistance
               after disregarding certain Social Security increases; code B signifies that FFP is available
               in expenditures for medical care and services which are benefits of the Medical
               Assistance program and also for SMIB premium payments;

       c.      Code C - for persons eligible to receive assistance under OAP “A”, OAP “B”, or OAP
               Refugee Assistance for financial assistance only; who do not receive SSI payment and
               do not otherwise qualify under SISC code B as described in item B. above; code C
               signifies that no FFP is available in Medical Assistance program expenditures.

       d.      Code D1 - for persons eligible to receive assistance under AwDC from program
               implementation through 12/31/2013; Code D1 signifies 50% FFP is available in
               expenditures for medical care and services which are benefits of the Medical Assistance
               program.

       e.      Code E1 - for persons eligible to receive assistance under the Medicaid Buy-In Program
               for Working Adults with Disabilities and whose annual adjusted gross income, as defined
               under IRS statute, is less than or equal to 450% of FPL - after SSI earned income
               deductions; as well as for children eligible to receive assistance under the Medicaid Buy-
               In Program for Children with Disabilities and whose household income is less than or
               equal to 300% of FPL after income disregards. Code E1 signifies that FFP is available in
               expenditures for medical care and services which are benefits of the Medical Assistance
               program but not for SMIB premium payments.

3.     Recipients of financial assistance under State AND, State AB, or OAP “C” are not automatically
       eligible for Medical Assistance and the SISC code which shall be entered on the eligibility
       reporting form is C.




                                                                                                         43
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                            10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


8.100.3.N.     Confidentiality

1.     All information obtained by the eligibility site concerning an applicant for or a recipient of Medical
       Assistance is confidential information.

2.     A signature on the Single Streamlined Application and the Application for Public Assistance
       allows an eligibility site worker to consult banks, employers, or any other agency or person to
       obtain information or verification to determine eligibility. The identification of the worker as an
       eligibility site employee will, in itself, disclose that an application for the Medical Assistance
       Program has been made by an individual. In this type of contact, as well as other community
       contacts, the eligibility site should strive to maintain confidentiality. The signature on the Single
       Streamlined Application and the Application for Public Assistance also provides permission for
       the release of the client's medical information to be provided by health care providers to the State
       and its agents for purpose of administration of the Medical Assistance Program.

3.     Eligibility site staff may release a client's Medical Assistance state identification number and
       approval eligibility spans to a Medical Assistance provider for billing purposes.

       Eligibility site staff may inform a Medical Assistance provider that an application has been denied
       but may not inform them of the reason why.

4.     Access to information concerning applicants or recipients must be restricted to persons or agency
       representatives who are subject to standards of confidentiality that are comparable to those of the
       State and the eligibility site.

5.     The eligibility site must obtain permission from a family, individual, or authorized representative,
       whenever possible, before responding to a request for information from an outside source, unless
       the information is to be used to verify income, eligibility and the amount of Medical Assistance
       payment. This permission must be obtained unless the request is from State authorities, federal
       authorities, or State contractors acting within the scope of their contract. If, because of an
       emergency situation, time does not permit obtaining consent before release, the eligibility site
       must notify the family or individual immediately after supplying the information.

6.     The eligibility site policies must apply to all requests for information from outside sources,
       including government bodies, the courts, or law enforcement officials. If a court issues a
       subpoena for a case record or for any eligibility site representative to testify concerning an
       applicant or recipient, the eligibility site must inform the court of the applicable statutory
       provisions, policies, and regulations restricting disclosure of information.

7.     The following types of information are confidential and shall be safeguarded:

       a.      Names and addresses of applicants for and recipients of the Medical Assistance
               Program;

       b.      Medical services provided;

       c.      Social and economic conditions or circumstances;

       d.      Agency evaluation of personal information;

       e.      Medical data, including diagnosis and past history of disease or disability;

       f.      All information obtained through the Income and Eligibility Verification System (IEVS), the
               Federal Data Services Hub (FDSH), Equifax The Work Number (TWN), Colorado
               Department of Labor and Employment, SSA or Internal Revenue Service;




                                                                                                            44
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                             10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


       g.      Any information received in connection with identification of legally liable third party
               resources;

       h.      Any information received for verifying income and resources if applicable, or other
               eligibility and the amount of Medical Assistance payments;

       i.      Social Security Numbers.

8.     The confidential information listed above may be released to persons outside the eligibility site
       only as follows:

       a.      In response to a valid subpoena or court order;

       b.      To State or Federal auditors, investigators or others designated by the Federal or State
               departments on a need-to-know basis;

       c.      To individuals executing Income and Eligibility Verification System;

       d.      Child Support enforcement officials;

       e.      To a recipient or applicant themselves or their designated representative.

       f.      To a Long Term Care institution on the AP-5615 form.

9.     The applicant/recipient may give a formal written release for disclosure of information to other
       agencies, such as hospitals, or the permission may be implied by the action of the other agency
       in rendering service to the client. Before information is released, the eligibility site should be
       reasonably certain the confidential nature of information will be preserved, the information will be
       used only for purposes related to the function of the inquiring agency, and the standards of
       protection established by the inquiring agency are equal to those established by the State
       Department. If the standards for protection of information are unknown, a written consent from the
       recipient shall be obtained.

8.100.3.O.     Protection Against Discrimination

1.     Eligibility sites are to administer the Medical Assistance Program in such a manner that no person
       will, on the basis of race, color, sex, age, religion, political belief, national origin, or handicap, be
       excluded from participation, be denied any aid, care, services, or other benefits of, or be
       otherwise subjected to discrimination in such program.

2.     The eligibility site shall not, directly or through contractual or other arrangements, on the grounds
       of race, color, sex, age, religion, political belief, national origin, or handicap:

       a.      Provide aid, care, services, or other benefits to an individual which is different, or
               provided in a different manner, from that of others;

       b.      Subject an individual to segregation barriers or separate treatment in any manner related
               to access to or receipt of assistance, care services, or other benefits;

       c.      Restrict an individual in any way in the enjoyment or any advantage or privilege enjoyed
               by others receiving aid, care, services, or other benefits provided under the Medical
               Assistance Program;




                                                                                                             45
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                              10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


       d.      Treat an individual differently from others in determining whether he/she satisfies any
               eligibility or other requirements or conditions which individuals shall meet in order to
               receive aid, care, services, or other benefits provided under the Medical Assistance
               Programs;

       e.      Deny an individual an opportunity to participate in programs of assistance through the
               provision of services or otherwise, or afford him/her an opportunity to do so which is
               different from that afforded others under the Medical Assistance Program.

3.     No distinction on the grounds of race, color, sex, age, religion, political belief, national origin, or
       handicap is permitted in relation to the use of physical facilities, intake and application
       procedures, caseload assignments, determination of eligibility, and the amount and type of
       benefits extended by the eligibility site to Medical Assistance recipients.

4.     An individual who believes he/she is being discriminated against may file a complaint with the
       eligibility site, the Department, or directly with the Federal government. When a complaint is filed
       with the eligibility site, the county director is responsible for an immediate investigation of the
       matter and taking necessary corrective action to eliminate any discriminatory activities found. If
       such activities are not found, the individual is given an explanation. If the person is not satisfied,
       he/she is requested to direct his/her complaint, in writing, to the State Department, Complaint
       Section, which will be responsible for further investigation and other necessary action consistent
       with the provisions of Title VI of the 1963 Civil Rights Act, as amended 42 U.S.C. §2000e et seq.
       and section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, as amended 29 U.S.C. §791.

8.100.3.P.     Redetermination of Eligibility

1.     “Redetermination of eligibility” means a case review and necessary verification to determine
       whether the Medical Assistance Program member continues to be eligible to receive Medical
       Assistance.

       “Reconsideration period” means the 90-day period following termination of eligibility.

       Beginning on the case approval date, a redetermination shall be accomplished at least every 12
       months for Title XIX Medical Assistance only cases. An eligibility site may redetermine eligibility
       through telephone, mail, or online electronically means.

2.     The eligibility site shall promptly redetermine eligibility when:

       a.      it receives and verifies information which indicates a change in a member’s
               circumstances which may affect continued eligibility for Medical Assistance; or

       b.      it receives direction to do so from the Department.

       The eligibility site shall redetermine eligibility according to timelines defined by the Department.

3.     Ex Parte Review: A redetermination form will not be sent to the member if all current eligibility
       requirements can be verified by reviewing information from another assistance program or if this
       information can be verified though an electronic verification system - this process is referenced
       as Ex Parte Review. The use of telephonic or electronic redeterminations shall be noted in the
       case record. When applicable, the eligibility site shall redetermine eligibility based solely on
       information already available. If verification or information is available for any of the six months
       prior to the redetermination month, and all other eligibility requirements are met, then an approval
       notice will be sent for all eligible members of the household who are requesting assistance. This
       approval notice shall include directions on how to view the information used to determine
       eligibility.




                                                                                                                 46
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                           10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


4.    If all required information is not available and/or the information received does not support a
      finding of eligibility, a redetermination form, and a verification form will be issued to the household
      at least 30 days before the end of the eligibility period. The household will be sent a prepopulated
      redetermination form with the current information on file and a notice of required verifications
      needed to determine eligibility.

      The redetermination form shall direct members to verify that the information provided is accurate
      or to report any changes to the information. Members must complete and return the
      redetermination with the necessary verifications and the signature form. If a member fails to sign
      the signature form or comply with any of these requirements, the member will be terminated from
      the program for failure to complete the redetermination process.

      The following procedures relate to mail-out redetermination:

      a.      A Redetermination Form shall be mailed to the member together with any other forms to
              be completed;

      b.      When the member is unable to complete the forms due to physical, mental or emotional
              disabilities, or other good cause, and has no one to help him/her, the eligibility site shall
              either assist the member or refer him/her to a legal or other resource. When initial
              arrangements or a change in arrangements are being made, an extension of up to thirty
              days shall be allowed. The action of the eligibility site in assistance or referral shall be
              recorded in the case record and CBMS case comments.

      c.      The redetermination form shall require that a recipient and community spouse of a
              recipient of HCBS, PACE or institutional services disclose a description of any interest
              the individual or community spouse has in an annuity or similar financial instrument
              regardless of whether the annuity is irrevocable or treated as an asset. The
              redetermination form shall include a statement that the Department shall be a remainder
              beneficiary for any annuity or similar financial instrument purchased on or after February
              8, 2006 for the total amount of Medical Assistance provided to the individual.

      d.      The eligibility site shall notify in writing the issuer of any annuity or financial instrument
              that the Department is a preferred remainder beneficiary in the annuity or similar financial
              instrument for the total amount of Medical Assistance provided to the individual. This
              notice shall require the issuer to notify the eligibility site when there is a change in the
              amount of income or principal that is being withdrawn from the annuity.

      e.      Members who return properly completed redetermination forms and requested
              information during the reconsideration period shall not be required to submit a new
              application for eligibility. If redetermination forms and requested information are not
              returned within 90 days after termination, the member must submit a new application to
              obtain enrollment in the program.

      f.      For individuals who are determined to be eligible for Medical Assistance within the
              reconsideration period, the effective date of coverage will be the first day of the month in
              which the redetermination form was returned. If the member has a gap in coverage due
              to submitting the redetermination within the reconsideration period, the member can
              request up to three months in retroactive coverage.




                                                                                                          47
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                            10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


5.     When the redetermination verification information is received by the eligibility site, it shall be date
       stamped. Within fifteen working days, the verification information shall be thoroughly reviewed for
       completeness, accuracy, and consistency. All factors shall be evaluated as to their effect on
       eligibility at that time. Verifications shall be documented in the case file and CBMS case
       comments. The case file shall be used as a checklist in the redetermination process, and shall be
       used to keep track of matters requiring further action. When additional information is needed:

       a.      if incomplete information is provided or a member reports new changes, a worker must
               request required verifications. A form with a letter specifying the items that require
               completion needs to be mailed to the member. The Medical Assistance member shall
               return the completed request form to the eligibility site no later than ten working days.;

       b.      if incomplete, inaccurate or inconsistent data is reported, the Medical Assistance member
               shall be contacted by telephone or in writing so that the worker may secure the proper
               information according to timelines defined by the Department.

6.     Due to the federal Coronavirus COVID-19 Public Health Emergency, the Department will continue
       eligibility for all Medical Assistance categories, regardless of a redetermination and/or reported
       change for these individuals to ensure continuity of eligibility for Medical Assistance coverage.
       Effective May 11, 2023 the Coronavirus COVID-19 Public Health Emergency has been declared
       to end. To ensure the Department maintains access to State and Federal funding provided by the
       Federal ‘Families First Coronavirus Response Act” Pub.L. 116-127, and the Federal
       “Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2023”, the Department will process eligibility redeterminations
       and/or changes for all members whose eligibility was maintained during the emergency
       declaration and take appropriate action including termination if no longer meeting eligibility
       criteria. Through the renewal process, a member may be disenrolled or their eligibility category
       may be changed based on information obtained by the state through electronic verifications,
       information provided by the member through the renewal, or the member’s failure to respond to
       the renewal. A member’s eligibility will no longer be maintained as it was during Public Health
       Emergency once their renewal due month has passed, and their renewal has been processed.

8.100.3.Q.     Continuous Eligibility (CE) for Medical Assistance programs

1.     Continuous eligibility applies to children under age 19, who through an eligibility determination,
       reassessment or redetermination, are found eligible for a Medical Assistance program. The
       continuous eligibility period may last for up to 12 months.

       a.      The continuous eligibility period applies without regard to changes in income or other
               factors that would otherwise cause the child to be ineligible.

       b.      Exception: A child’s continuous eligibility period will end effective the earliest possible
               month if any of the following occur:

               i)       Child is deceased;

               ii)      Becomes an inmate of a public institution;

                        1.      Incarcerated children receiving a full medical assistance program will
                                move to a limited Incarceration benefit. If the child is released within the
                                initial 12 months of the CE period, full coverage will be reinstated for the
                                remaining 12-month CE period, unless any of the other exceptions apply;

               iii)     The child is no longer part of the Medical Assistance required household;

               iv)      Is no longer a Colorado resident;




                                                                                                             48
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                           10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


              v)       Is unable to be located; based on evidence or reasonable assumption;

              vi)      Requests to be withdrawn from continuous eligibility;

              vii)     Fails to provide documentation during a reasonable opportunity period as
                       specified in section 8.100.3.G.3 and 8.100.3.H.9; or

              viii)    Eligibility was erroneously granted at the most recent determination,
                       redetermination, or renewal of eligibility because of agency error, or a finding of
                       fraud or perjury attributed to the child or the child's responsible party.

2.    The continuous eligibility period will begin on the first day of the month the application is received,
      or from the date all criteria are met. For a child transitioning from CHP+ to the MAGI Medical
      Assistance program specified in section 8.100.4.G.2, a new 12-month continuous eligibility period
      will begin on the first day of the month of the transition. Continuous eligibility applies to children
      enrolled in the following Medical Assistance programs:

      a.      MAGI-Medical Assistance, program as specified in section 8.100.4.G.2;

      b.      SSI Mandatory, as specified in section 8.100.6.C

              i.)      When a child is no longer eligible for SSI Mandatory they will be categorized as
                       eligible within the MAGI-Child category for the remainder of the eligibility period;

      c.      Long- Term Care services

              i.)      When a child is no longer eligible for Long-Term Care services they will be
                       categorized as eligible within the MAGI- Child category for the remainder of the
                       eligibility period;

      d.      Medicaid Buy-In program specified in section 8.100.6.Q

              i)       Exception: Enrollment will be discontinued if there is a failure to pay premiums;

      e.      Pickle (Title II COLA/Pickle Amendment of 1977);

      f.      Disabled Adult Child (DAC); and

      g.      Limited Family Planning Medical Assistance.

3.    Children, under the age of 19, no longer enrolled in Foster Care Medicaid will be eligible for the
      MAGI-Medical Assistance program. The continuous eligibility period will begin the month the child
      is no longer enrolled in Foster Care Medicaid as long as they meet one of the following
      conditions:

      a.      Begin living with other Relatives;

      b.      Are reunited with Parents; or

      c.      Have received guardianship.




                                                                                                           49
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                             10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


8.100.4           MAGI Medical Assistance Eligibility [Eff. 01/01/2014]

8.100.4.A.        MAGI Application Requirements

1.        Persons requesting a MAGI Medical Assistance category need only to complete the Single
          Streamlined Application.

2.        Parents and Caretaker Relatives, Pregnant Women, Children, and Adults may apply for Medical
          Assistance at sites other than the County Department of Social Services, including eligibility sites
          and Certified Application Assistance Sites (CAAS). The Department shall approve these sites to
          receive and initially process these applications. The application used shall be the Single
          Streamlined Application. The eligibility site shall determine eligibility.

3.        The eligibility sites shall refer Medical Assistance clients who are pregnant and/or age 20 and
          under to EPSDT offices (designated by the Department) by:

          a.      Copying the page of the Single Streamlined Application that includes the EPSDT benefit
                  questions. The eligibility site will then forward this page to the EPSDT office within five
                  working days from the date of application approval; or by:

          b.      Means of secure, electronic data transfer approved by the Department

8.100.4.B.        MAGI Category Verification Requirements

1.        Minimal Verification - At minimum, applicants seeking Medical Assistance shall provide all of the
          following:

          a.      Social Security Number: Each individual requesting assistance on the application shall
                  provide a Social Security Number (SSN), or each shall submit proof of an application to
                  obtain an SSN, unless they qualify for an exception listed in 8.100.3.I.1.b. Individuals who
                  qualify for an exception must not be required to provide an SSN.

                  i)      Due to the COVID-19 Public Health Emergency, at the time of application, self-
                          attestation is acceptable for SSN criteria, with the exception of verification of
                          citizenship and immigration status. At the end of the federally declared COVID-19
                          Public Health Emergency, verification for SSN eligibility criteria will be required at
                          the time of application. Effective May 11, 2023 the Coronavirus COVID-19 Public
                          Health Emergency has been declared to end.

                          1)       Applicants who meet the criteria for any categorical Medical Assistance
                                   programs, but do not meet federal and state citizenship and immigration
                                   status requirements, are only eligible to receive emergency medical
                                   services.

          b.      Verification of citizenship and identity as outlined in section 8.100.3.H under Citizenship
                  and Identity Documentation Requirements.

          c.      Earned Income: Income -may be self-attested by an applicant or member and verified
                  through an electronic data source. Individuals who provide self-attestation of income -
                  may provide a SSN for electronic wage verification purposes.




                                                                                                             50
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                           10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


              If the self-attested earned income cannot be verified electronically, due to a missing SSN,
              the applicant must provide documentation of income. Earned income must be verified by
              wage stubs, tax documents, written documentation from the employer stating the
              employee’s gross income or a telephone call to an employer. Applicants may request that
              communication with their employers be made in writing.

              Estimated earned income shall be used to determine eligibility if the applicant/client
              provides less than a full calendar month of wage stubs for the application month. A single
              recent wage stub shall be sufficient if the applicant's income is expected to be the same
              amount for the month of application. Verification of earned income received during the
              month prior to the month of application shall be acceptable if the application month
              verification is not yet available. Actual earned income shall be used to determine eligibility
              if the client provides verification for the full calendar month.

              Due to the Coronavirus COVID -19 Public Health Emergency, the Department will not
              take action on any electronic interfaces that notify that the individual’s income has
              changed for all Medical Assistance programs in which the individual is currently enrolled.
              The Department will take action and require documentation from the individual once the
              federal emergency declaration has concluded. Effective May 11, 2023 the Coronavirus
              COVID-19 Public Health Emergency has been declared to end.

      d.      Unearned income: Unearned income can be self-attested by an applicant. Certain types
              of unearned income, such as unemployment and survivor benefits may be verified
              through electronic data sources. Due to the Coronavirus COVID -19 Public Health
              Emergency, the Department will not take action on any electronic interfaces that notify
              that the individual’s income has changed for all Medical Assistance programs in which
              the individual is currently enrolled. The Department will take action and require
              documentation from the individual once the federal emergency declaration has
              concluded, for all people whose eligibility was maintained during the emergency
              declaration, for these individuals to maintain eligibility. Effective May 11, 2023 the
              Coronavirus COVID-19 Public Health Emergency has been declared to end.

      e.      Verification of Legal Immigrant Status: Immigration status may be self-declared by an
              applicant applying for Medical Assistance, to determine eligibility for full Medical
              Assistance benefits. This declaration of legal immigration status will be verified through
              the Verify Lawful Presence (VLP) interface. The VLP interface connects to the
              Systematic Alien Verification for Entitlements (SAVE) program to verify legal immigration
              status. See section 8.100.3.G for a description of the VLP interface. If status cannot be
              verified, or if the applicant does not provide the necessary documents within the
              reasonable opportunity period, then the applicant’s Medical Assistance application shall
              be terminated.

2.    Additional Verification: No other verification shall be required of the client unless information is
      found to be questionable on the basis of fact.

3.    The determination that information is questionable shall be documented in the applicant's case
      file and CBMS case comments.

4.    Information that exists in another case record or in CBMS shall be used by the eligibility site to
      verify those factors that are not subject to change, if the information is reasonably accessible.

5.    The criteria of age and relationship may be declared by the client unless questionable. If
      questionable, these criteria may be established with information provided from:




                                                                                                             51
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                           10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


       a.      official papers such as: a birth certificate, order of adoption, marriage license, immigration
               or naturalization papers; or

       b.      records or statements from sources such as: a court, school, government agency,
               hospital, or physician.

6.     Establishing that a dependent child meets the eligibility criteria of:

       a.      age, if questionable requires (1) viewing the birth certificate or comparably reliable
               document at eligibility site discretion, and (2) documenting the source of verification in the
               case file and CBMS case comments;

       b.      living in the home of the caretaker relative, if questionable requires (1) viewing the
               appropriate documents which identify the relationship, (2) documenting these sources of
               verification in the case file and CBMS case comments.

8.100.4.C.     MAGI Methodology for Income Calculation

1.     For an in depth treatment of gross income, refer to 26 U.S.C. § 61, which is hereby incorporated
       by reference. The incorporation of 26 U.S.C. § 61 (2014) excludes later amendments to, or
       editions of, the referenced material. Pursuant to § 24-4-103(12.5), C.R.S., the Department
       maintains copies of this incorporated text in its entirety, available for public inspection during
       regular business hours at: Colorado Department of Health Care Policy and Financing, 1570 Grant
       Street, Denver CO 80203. Certified copies of incorporated materials are provided at cost upon
       request. Except as otherwise provided, pursuant to 26 U.S.C. § 61 gross income means all
       income from all derived sources, The Modified Adjusted Gross Income calculation for the
       purposes of determining a household’s financial eligibility for Medical Assistance shall consist of,
       but is not limited to, the following:

       a.      Earned Income:

               i)       Wages, salaries, tips;

               ii)      Gross income derived from business;

               iii)     Gains derived from dealings in property;

               iv)      Distributive share of partnership gross income (not a limited partner);

               v)       Compensation for services, including fees, commissions, fringe benefits and
                        similar items; and

               vi)      Taxable private disability income.

       b.      Unearned Income:

               i)       Interest (includes tax exempt interest);

               ii)      Rents;

               iii)     Royalties;

               iv)      Dividends;




                                                                                                          52
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                      10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


            v)      Alimony received counts as unearned income if the divorce or legal separation is
                    executed on or before December 31, 2018. Alimony received will not be
                    countable income if the divorce or legal separation is modified or executed on or
                    after January 1, 2019;

            vi)     Pensions and annuities;

            vii)    Income from life insurance and endowment contracts;

            viii)   Income from discharge of indebtedness;

            ix)     Income in respect of a decedent;

            x)      Income from an interest in an estate or trust;

            xi)     Social Security (SSA) income;

            xii)    Distributive share of partnership gross income (limited partner);

            xiii)   Capital gains;

            xiv)    Lottery/Gambling Winnings;

                    1)      If less than $79,999 winnings are counted as income in the month
                            received.

                    2)      If over $79,999 but less than $89,999 it is counted as income and it is
                            divided equally between two months.

                    3)      For every additional $10,000 over $89,999, one month is added, and
                            divided equally and counted as income for each month.

                    4)      Lottery/gambling winnings of an individual will continue to count only in
                            the month received in determining the eligibility for the members of their
                            household.

                    5)      An applicant/member may request a hardship exemption when an
                            application is denied or enrollment is terminated due to Lottery/Gambling
                            winnings.

                            a.       The applicant/member must demonstrate a severe medical or
                                     financial hardship.

                            b.       The applicant/member must provide a written request and
                                     documentation to their County Department of Human Services,
                                     within 30 calendar days from the date of their denial or
                                     termination notice.

            xv)     Student loan debt that is discharged, forgiven, or cancelled is treated as taxable
                    income to the borrower, with certain exceptions.

                    1)      This debt will not be considered income for the borrower in the event of
                            death or permanent and total disability of the student (the borrower and
                            the student may or may not be the same person) if discharged during tax
                            years 2018 through 2025.




                                                                                                      53
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                        10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


                    2)      At the Departments discretion, this debt will not be considered countable
                            income for the borrower if discharged, forgiven, or cancelled under
                            programs which include, but not limited to:

                            a)       Public Service loan forgiveness;

                            b)       Teacher loan forgiveness;

                            c)       Healthcare loan forgiveness; and

                            d)       Closed School discharge.

      c.    Additional Income: In addition to the types of income identified in section 8.100.4.C.1.a-
            b., the following income is included in the MAGI calculation.

            i)      Any tax exempt interest income.

            ii)     Untaxed foreign wages and salaries.

            iii)    Social Security Title II Benefits (Old Age, Disability and Survivor’s benefits).

      d.    The following are Income exclusions:

            i)      An amount received as a lump sum is counted as income only in the month
                    received;

            ii)     Scholarships, awards, or fellowship grants used for educational purposes and not
                    for living expenses;

            iii)    Child support received;

            iv)     Worker’s Compensation;

            v)      Supplemental Security Income (SSI);

            vi)     Veteran’s Benefits;

            vii)    The federal Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES) Act and
                    the American Rescue Plan (ARP) Act Recovery Rebate, also known as the
                    COVID-19 Economic Stimulus, shall be exempt from consideration as income.

            viii)   Federal Pandemic Unemployment Compensation (FPUC) program, which
                    provides an extra $600.00 a week for qualified individuals, is exempt as
                    countable unearned income.

            ix)     American Indian/Alaskan Native income exceptions listed at 42 C.F.R. §
                    435.603(e) (2012) is hereby incorporated by reference. The incorporation of 42
                    C.F.R. § 435.603(e) (2012) excludes later amendments to, or editions of, the
                    referenced material. Pursuant to § 24-4-103(12.5), C.R.S., the Department
                    maintains copies of this incorporated text in its entirety, available for public
                    inspection during regular business hours at: Colorado Department of Health Care
                    Policy and Financing, 1570 Grant Street, Denver, CO 80203. Certified copies of
                    incorporated materials are provided at cost upon request.




                                                                                                       54
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                         10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


      e.    Allowable Deductions: For an in-depth treatment of allowable deductions from gross
            income, refer to 26 U.S.C. 62, which is hereby incorporated by reference. The
            incorporation of 26 U.S.C. 62 (2014) excludes later amendments to, or editions of, the
            referenced material. Pursuant to § 24-4-103(12.5), C.R.S., the Department maintains
            copies of this incorporated text in its entirety, available for public inspection during regular
            business hours at: Colorado Department of Health Care Policy and Financing, 1570
            Grant Street, Denver CO 80203. Certified copies of incorporated materials are provided
            at cost upon request.

            The following deductions may be subtracted from an individual’s taxable gross income, in
            order to calculate the Adjusted Gross Income (AGI) including (but not limited to):

            i)      Student loan interest deductions;

            ii)     Certain Self- employment expenses SEP, SIMPLE and qualified plans, and
                    health insurance deductions;

            iii)    Deductible part of self-employment tax;

            iv)     Health savings account deduction;

            v)      Certain business expenses of reservists, performing artist, and fee-basis
                    government officials;

            vi)     Reimbursed expenses of employees;

            vii)    Moving expenses for active duty military who are moving due to a permanent
                    change of station;

            viii)   IRA deduction: Regular Individual Retirement Account (IRA) contributions
                    claimed on a federal income tax return and which does not exceed the IRA
                    contributions limits; (Pre-tax contributions to a 401(k) or 403(b) retirement plan
                    are excluded from earned income);

            ix)     Penalty on early withdrawal of savings;

            x)      Domestic production activities deduction;

            xi)     Alimony paid may be deducted only if the divorce or legal separation is executed
                    on or before December 31, 2018. It cannot be deducted if the divorce or
                    separation is modified or executed on or after January 1, 20019;

            xii)    Certain educator expenses;

            xiii)   Certain pre-tax contributions;

            xiv)    Net operating losses; and

            xv)     Capital losses.

      f.    Income of children and tax dependents:

            i)      The income of a child who is included in the household of their natural, adopted,
                    or step parent will not be included in the household income unless that child has
                    income above the tax filing threshold.




                                                                                                         55
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                        10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


                      1)      Income from Title II Social Security benefits and Tier I Railroad benefits
                              are excluded when determining if a child is required to file taxes.

              ii)     The income of a person, other than a child or spouse, who expects to be claimed
                      as a tax dependent will not be included in the household income of the taxpayer
                      unless that tax dependent has income above the tax filing threshold.

                      1)      Income from Title II Social Security benefits and Tier I Railroad benefits
                              are excluded when determining if a tax dependent is required to file
                              taxes.

              ii)     The income of a child or tax dependent who does not live with their natural,
                      adopted, or step parent will always count towards the determination of their own
                      eligibility, even if the child’s or tax dependent’s income is below the tax filing
                      threshold.

2.    Income verifications: When discrepancies arise between self-attested income and electronic data
      source results, the applicant shall receive a reasonable opportunity to establish his/her financial
      eligibility through the test for reasonable compatibility, by providing a reasonable explanation of
      the discrepancy, or by providing supporting documentation within the Reasonable Opportunity
      Period of 30 calendar days.

      a.      Income information obtained through an electronic data source shall be considered
              reasonably compatible with income information provided by or on behalf of an applicant
              in the following circumstances:

              i)      If the amount attested by the applicant and the amount reported by an electronic
                      data source are both below the applicable MAGI Medical Assistance program
                      income standard, that income shall be determined reasonably compatible and
                      the applicant shall be determined eligible.

              ii)     If the amount attested by the applicant is below the applicable MAGI Medical
                      Assistance program income standard, but the amount reported by the electronic
                      data source is above, and the difference is within the reasonable compatibility
                      threshold percentage of 20%, the income shall be determined reasonably
                      compatible and the applicant shall be determined eligible.

              iii)    If both amounts are above the applicable MAGI Medical Assistance program
                      income standard the income shall be determined reasonably compatible, and the
                      applicant shall continue to be determined eligible during the federal Coronavirus
                      COVID-19 Public Health Emergency.

                      Effective May 11, 2023 the Coronavirus COVID-19 Public Health Emergency has
                      been declared to end and the effective policy after May 11,2023 is if both
                      amounts are above the applicable income standard for that program, the income
                      shall be determined reasonably compatible, and the applicant shall be
                      determined ineligible due to income.




                                                                                                       56
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                          10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


       b.      If income information provided by or on behalf of an applicant is not determined
               reasonably compatible with income information obtained through an electronic data
               source, a reasonable explanation of the discrepancy shall be requested during the
               federal Coronavirus COVID-19 Public Health Emergency. If the applicant does not
               provide the required documentation within the reasonable opportunity period, then the
               applicant's Medical Assistance benefits shall not be terminated during the federal
               Coronavirus COVID-19 Public Health Emergency. When the federal COVID-19 Public
               Health Emergency has ended, a reasonable opportunity period will be given to request
               proper documentation from the member.

               i)      During the federal Coronavirus COVID-19 Public Health Emergency the
                       Department may request paper documentation when the Department does not
                       find income to be reasonably compatible. If the member does or does not provide
                       paper documentation they will remain eligible during the public health emergency
                       period.

                       Effective May 11, 2023 the Coronavirus COVID-19 Public Health Emergency has
                       been declared to end and the effective policy after May 11, 2023 is the
                       Department may request paper documentation only if the Department does not
                       find income to be reasonably compatible and if the applicant does not provide a
                       reasonable explanation or if electronic data are not available.

3.     Self-Employment - If the applicant is self-employed the ledger included in the Single Streamlined
       Application shall be sufficient verification of earnings, unless questionable.

4.     Budget Periods for MAGI-based Income determination - The financial eligibility of applicants for
       Medical Assistance shall be determined based on current or previous monthly household income
       and family size.

       a.      Applicants who are found financially ineligible based on current or previous monthly
               household income and family size, and whose household has earned income from self-
               employment, seasonal employment, and/or commission-based employment, shall have
               their financial eligibility determined using annualized self-employment, seasonal
               employment, and commission-based employment income.

5.     If an applicant does not meet the financial eligibility requirements for Medical Assistance based
       on MAGI, but meets all other eligibility requirements, the applicant shall be found eligible for
       MAGI Medical Assistance if the applicant’s income, as calculated using the methodology for
       determining eligibility for Advanced Premium Tax Credits or Cost Sharing Reductions through the
       marketplace, is below 100% of the federal poverty level.

8.100.4.D.     Income Disregard

1.     An income disregard equivalent to five percentage points of the Federal Poverty Level for the
       applicable family size will be subtracted from MAGI-based income.

       a.      If an individual’s MAGI-based countable income is above the income threshold for the
               applicable MAGI program under title XIX (Medicaid) or title XXI (CHP+) of the Social
               Security Act, the five percent (5%) disregard will be applied for each qualifying MAGI
               program as the last step to determine eligibility.

       b.      If the countable income is below the income threshold for the applicable MAGI program,
               the individual is income eligible and the five percent (5%) disregard will not be applied to
               determine eligibility.




                                                                                                         57
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                           10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


8.100.4.E.    Determining MAGI Household Composition.

1.     MAGI household composition is similar to, but not necessarily the same as a tax household. To
       determine MAGI household composition, the individual’s relationship to the tax filer must be
       established as declared on the Single Streamlined Application.

       a.     In the case of an applicant who expects to file a tax return for the taxable year in which
              an initial determination or renewal of eligibility is being made, and does not expect to be
              claimed as a tax dependent by anyone else, then the applicant’s MAGI household shall
              consist of the following:

              i)      The Tax-Filer;

              ii)     The Tax-Filer’s spouse if living in the home;

              iii)    All persons whom the Tax-Filer expects to claim as a tax dependent on their
                      personal income tax return

       b.     In the case of an applicant who expects to be claimed as a tax dependent by another
              taxpayer for the taxable year in which an initial determination or renewal of eligibility is
              being made, the applicant’s MAGI household shall be:

              i)      The Tax Dependent;

              ii)     The Tax-Filer and their spouse if living in the home;

              iii)    The Tax-Filer’s other tax dependents;

              iv)     The Tax Dependent’s spouse, if living with the Tax Dependent.

       c.     The MAGI household of an applicant who expects to be claimed as a tax dependent is as
              outlined in 8.100.4.E.b above, except in the following circumstances:

              i)      The applicant expects to be claimed as a tax dependent by someone other than
                      a spouse, biological, adoptive or step parent.

              ii)     The applicant is a child under 19 who is expected to be claimed by one parent as
                      a tax dependent and is living with both parents, but the parents do not expect to
                      file a joint tax return.

              iii)    The applicant is a child under 19 and who expects to be claimed as a tax
                      dependent by anon-custodial parent.

       d.     If the applicant meets one of the exceptions in 8.100.4.E.c above or is a non-filer,
              household composition shall be determined using the following non-filer rules and the
              applicant’s household shall consist of the following:

              i)      The applicant;

              ii)     The applicant’s spouse who lives in the household;

              iii)    The applicant’s natural, adopted, and step children under the age of 19, who live
                      in the household; and




                                                                                                             58
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                            10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


                iv)      In the case of applicants under the age of 19, the applicant’s natural, adoptive,
                         and step parents and natural, adoptive, and step siblings under age 19, who live
                         in the household.

2.      When a household includes a pregnant woman, regardless of the Medical Assistance category,
        the pregnant woman is counted as herself plus the number of children she is expected to deliver.

3.      When a household includes an individual applying for the limited Family Planning Medical
        Assistance category, the individual is counted as a household of two in addition to any other
        household members.

4.      Married couples living together will each be included in the other’s MAGI household regardless of
        whether or not they expect to file taxes jointly, separately or if one expects to be claimed as a tax
        dependent of the other.

5.      If a child is claimed as a tax dependent by both parents who are married and who will file taxes
        jointly but one parent lives outside of the household due to separation or pending divorce, the
        child’s household composition is determined by non-filer rules. The parent living outside of the
        household will not be counted as part of the household.

6.      An individual who is both a tax dependent and a tax filer will be considered a tax dependent for
        the purpose of determining eligibility for Medical Assistance.

8.100.4.F.      MAGI Category Presumptive Eligibility

1.      A pregnant applicant may apply for presumptive eligibility for ambulatory services through
        Medical Assistance presumptive eligibility sites. A child under the age of 19 may apply or have an
        adult apply on their behalf for presumptive eligibility for State Plan approved medical services
        through presumptive eligibility sites. Presumptive eligibility is available to applicants for limited
        family planning who are not pregnant. There are no restrictions of age or gender under the limited
        family planning presumptive eligibility category.

2.      To be eligible for presumptive eligibility:

        a.      a pregnant woman shall have an attested pregnancy, declare that her household's
                income shall not exceed 195% of the federal poverty level (MAGI-equivalent) and declare
                that she is a United States citizen or a lawfully residing immigrant. Refer to the MAGI-
                Medicaid income guidelines chart available on the Department’s website

        b.      a child under the age of 19 shall have a declared household income that does not exceed
                133% of federal poverty level (MAGI-equivalent) and declare that the child is a United
                States citizen or a documented immigrant.

        c.      To qualify for limited family planning presumptive eligibility, an applicant must have
                declared household income greater than 133% but not exceeding 260% of the federal
                poverty level. The applicant cannot be eligible for a Medicaid eligibility category that
                provides full coverage. The applicant must declare they are a United States citizen or a
                lawfully residing immigrant. An applicant applying for limited family planning presumptive
                eligibility will be counted individually as a household member of two.

3.      Presumptive eligibility sites shall be certified by the Department to make presumptive eligibility
        determinations. Sites shall be re-certified by the Department every 2 years to remain approved
        presumptive eligibility sites.




                                                                                                             59
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                           10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


4.     The presumptive eligibility site shall forward the application to the county within five business
       days.

5.     The presumptive eligibility period begins on the date the applicant(s) is determined eligible and
       ends with the day an eligibility determination for Medical Assistance is made for the applicant(s)

6.     A presumptive eligible client may not appeal the end of a presumptive eligibility period.

7.     Presumptively eligible women and Medical Assistance clients may appeal the county
       department's failure to act on an application within 45 days from date of application or the denial
       of an application. Appeal procedures are outlined in the State Hearings section of this volume.

8.100.4.G.     MAGI Covered Groups

1.     For MAGI Medical Assistance, any person who is determined to be eligible for Medical
       Assistance based on MAGI at any time during a calendar month shall be eligible for benefits
       during the entire month.

2.     Children applying for Medical Assistance whose total household income does not exceed 142%
       of the federal poverty level shall be determined financially eligible for Medical Assistance. Refer to
       the MAGI-Medicaid income guidelines chart available on the Department’s website.

       a.      Children are eligible for Children’s MAGI Medical Assistance through the end of the
               month in which they turn 19 years old. After turning 19, the individual may be eligible for a
               different Medical Assistance category.

3.     Parents and Caretaker Relatives applying for Medical Assistance whose total household income
       does not exceed 68% of the federal poverty level (MAGI-equivalent) shall be determined
       financially eligible for Medical Assistance. Parents or Caretaker Relatives eligible for this category
       shall have a dependent child in the household.

       a.      A dependent child is considered to be living in the home of the parent or caretaker
               relative as long as the parent or specified relative exercises responsibility for the care and
               control of the child even if:

               i)       The child is under the jurisdiction of the court (for example, receiving probation
                        services);

               ii)      Legal custody is held by an agency that does not have physical possession of
                        the child;

               iii)     The child is in regular attendance at a school away from home;

               iv)      Either the child or the relative is away from the home to receive medical
                        treatment;

               v)       Either the child or the relative is temporarily absent from the home;

               vi)      The child is in voluntary foster care placement for a period not expected to
                        exceed three months. Should the foster care plan change within the three
                        months and the placement become court ordered, the child is no longer
                        considered to be living in the home as of the time the foster care plan is changed.




                                                                                                             60
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                          10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


4.    Adults applying for Medical Assistance whose total household income does not exceed 133% of
      the federal poverty level shall be determined financially eligible for Medical Assistance. This
      category includes adults who are parents or caretaker relatives of dependent children whose
      income exceeds the income threshold to qualify for the Parents and Caretaker Relatives MAGI
      category and who meet all other eligibility criteria.

      a.      A dependent child living in the household of a parent or caretaker relative shall have
              minimum essential coverage, in order for the parent or caretaker relative to be eligible for
              Medical Assistance under this category. Refer to section 8.100.4.G.3.a on who is
              considered a dependent child.

      b.      Due to the COVID-19 Public Health Emergency an applicant who is not eligible for
              Medical Assistance but has been impacted through exposure to or potential infection with
              COVID-19 may be eligible to receive services for COVID-19 testing only. To qualify for
              this limited benefit, the applicant must satisfy residency and immigration or citizenship
              status and not be enrolled in other health insurance.

5.    Pregnant Women whose household income does not exceed 195% of the federal poverty level
      (MAGI-equivalent) are eligible for the Pregnant Women MAGI Medical Assistance program.
      Medical Assistance shall be provided to a pregnant woman for a period beginning with the date of
      application for Medical Assistance through the last day of the 12 th month following the date the
      pregnancy ends. Once eligibility has been approved, Medical Assistance coverage will be
      provided regardless of changes in the woman's financial circumstances once the income
      verification requirements are met.

      a.      A pregnant women’s eligibility period will end effective the earliest possible month, if the
              following occurs:

              i)      Fails to provide a reasonable explanation or paper documentation when self-
                      attested income is not reasonably compatible with income information from an
                      electronic data source, by the end of the 30day reasonable opportunity period.
                      This exception only applies the first-time income is verified following an initial
                      eligibility determination or an annual redetermination.

6.    A lawfully admitted non-citizen who is pregnant and who has been in the United States for less
      than five years is eligible for Medical Assistance if she meets all of the other eligibility
      requirements specified at 8.100.4.G.5 and fits into one of the immigration categories listed in
      8.100.3.G.1.g.iii.1-5 and 8.100.3.G.1.g.vi.1-15. This population is referenced as Legal Immigrant
      Prenatal.

7.    A child whose mother is receiving Medical Assistance at the time of the child's birth is
      continuously eligible for one year. This population is referred to as “Eligible Needy Newborn”. This
      coverage also applies in instances where the mother received Medical Assistance to cover the
      child’s birth through retroactive Medical Assistance. The child is not required to live with the
      mother receiving Medical Assistance to qualify as an Eligible Needy Newborn.

      a.      To receive Medical Assistance under this category, the birth must be reported verbally or
              in writing to the County Department of Human Services or eligibility site. Information
              provided shall include the baby’s name, date of birth, and mother’s name or Medical
              Assistance number. A newborn can be reported at any time by any person. Once
              reported, a newborn meeting the above criteria shall be added to the mother’s Medical
              Assistance case, or his or her own case if the newborn does not reside with the mother,
              according to timelines defined by the Department. If adopted, the newborn’s agent does
              not need to file an application or provide a Social Security Number or proof of application
              for a Social Security Number for the newborn




                                                                                                           61
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                            10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


8.     Applicants applying for Medical Assistance whose total household income is greater than 133%
       but does not exceed 260% of the federal poverty level shall be determined financially eligible for
       limited Family Planning Medical Assistance services. The applicant must satisfy residency and
       immigration or citizenship status to qualify for this limited benefit. The limited family planning
       services eligibility category has no age or gender restriction and is available for those not eligible
       for a Medicaid eligibility category that provides full coverage.

8.100.4.H.     Needy Persons

1.     Medical Assistance shall be provided to certain needy persons under 21 years of age, including
       the following:

       a.      Those receiving care in a Long Term Care Institution eligible for Medical Assistance
               reimbursement or receiving active treatment as inpatients in a psychiatric facility eligible
               for Medical Assistance reimbursement and whose household income is less than the
               MAGI needs standard for his/her family size when the client applies for assistance.
               Clients that are receiving benefits under this category and are still receiving active
               inpatient treatment in the facility at age 21 shall be eligible to age 22. This population is
               referenced as Psych <21.

       b.      Those for whom the Department of Human Services is assuming full or partial financial
               responsibility and who are in foster care, in homes or private institutions or in subsidized
               adoptive homes. A child shall be the responsibility of the county, even if the child may be
               in a medical institution at that time. See Colorado Department of Human Services “Social
               Services Staff Manual” section 7 for specific eligibility requirements (12 CCR § 2509-1).
               12 CCR § 2509-1 (2013) is hereby incorporated by reference. The incorporation of 12
               CCR § 2509-1 excludes later amendments to, or editions of, the referenced material.
               Pursuant to § 24-4-103(12.5), C.R.S., the Department maintains copies of this
               incorporated text in its entirety, available for public inspection during regular business
               hours at: Colorado Department of Health Care Policy and Financing, 1570 Grant Street,
               Denver CO 80203. Certified copies of incorporated materials are provided at cost upon
               request.

       c.      Those for whom the Department of Human Services is assuming full or partial financial
               responsibility and who are in independent living situations subsequent to being in foster
               care.

       d.      Those for whom the Department of Human Services is assuming full or partial
               responsibility and who are receiving services under the state’s Alternatives to Foster
               Care Program and would be in foster care except for this program and whose household
               income is less than the MAGI needs standard for his/her family size.

       e.      Those for whom the Department of Human Services is assuming full or partial
               responsibility and who are removed from their home either with or without (court ordered)
               parental consent, placed in the custody of the county and residing in a county approved
               foster home.

       f.      Those for whom the Department of Human Services is assuming full or partial
               responsibility and who are receiving services under the state’s subsidized adoption
               program, including a clause in the subsidized adoption agreement to provide Medical
               Assistance for the child.




                                                                                                           62
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                            10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


        g.      Those for whom the Department of Human Services is assuming full or partial financial
                responsibility on their 18th birthday or at the time of emancipation. These individuals also
                must have received foster care maintenance payments or subsidized adoption payments
                from the State of Colorado pursuant to article 7 of title 26, C.R.S. immediately prior to the
                date the individual attained 18 years of age or was emancipated. Eligibility shall be
                extended until the individual’s 21st birthday for these individuals with the exception of
                those receiving subsidized adoption payments.

2.      Medical Assistance shall be extended to certain needy persons until the end of the month of the
        individual’s 26th birthday, including the following:

        a.      Those individuals that were formerly in foster care under the responsibility of Colorado or
                Tribe on their 18th, 19th, 20th or up to their 21st birthday and were receiving Medical
                Assistance.

                i)       This extension does not apply to youth that are receiving subsidized adoption
                         payments or

                ii)      To youth that are enrolled in mandatory Medical Assistance.

                iii)     This extension applies to Individuals who were in foster care at the age 18 on or
                         after January 1, 2023, and were enrolled in Medicaid in another state, and who
                         have become a resident of Colorado.

        b)      Former Foster Care youth are not subject to either an income or resource test.

        c)      Former Foster Care youth’s newborn shall be considered a needy newborn.

8.100.4.I.      Transitional Medical Assistance and 4 Month Extended Medical Assistance

1.      Eligibility for Transitional Medical Assistance shall be granted for twelve months (beginning with
        the first month of ineligibility) to individuals who are no longer eligible for the Parent/Caretaker
        Relative category due to a change in income.

        The extension shall be applied to individuals who:

        a.      Were eligible for the Parent/Caretaker Relative category in at least three of the six
                months preceding the month in which the individual would have become ineligible, and

        b.      Are no longer eligible for coverage under the Parent/Caretaker Relative category
                because of new or increased income from employment or hours of employment

                i)       At least one Parent/Caretaker Relative must continue to be employed and cannot
                         terminate employment without good cause. This does not need to be the same
                         person for the whole period the family is receiving Transitional Medical
                         Assistance.

2.      Any dependent child or Parent/Caretaker Relative who was or becomes part of the Medical
        Assistance household after the individual has begun receiving Transitional Medical Assistance is
        eligible for the remaining months of Transitional Medical Assistance.

        a.      A dependent child in the household who received Medical Assistance through continuous
                eligibility, but is no longer eligible for Medical Assistance based on a redetermination, is
                eligible for the family’s remaining months of Transitional Medical Assistance.




                                                                                                               63
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                              10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


        b.      An individual in the household who received Medical Assistance, but is no longer eligible
                for Medical Assistance based on a redetermination, is eligible for the family’s remaining
                months of Transitional Medical Assistance

3.      To become or remain eligible for Transitional Medical Assistance the household must include a
        dependent child. If it is determined that the household no longer has a child living in the home,
        Transitional Medicaid Assistance shall discontinue at the end of the month in which the
        household does not include a dependent child.

4.      When Transitional Medical Assistance ends the case will be reassessed for all other categories of
        Medical Assistance for which the family members may be eligible. A new application shall not be
        required for this process.

5.      Eligibility for Medical Assistance shall be extended for four months (beginning with the first month
        of ineligibility) for certain families who become ineligible for Medical Assistance due solely or
        partially to the receipt of support income, such as alimony. The extension shall be applied for a
        family which receives assistance under Medical Assistance in at least three of the six months
        immediately preceding the month in which the family becomes ineligible for assistance. To be
        eligible for the four month Medical Assistance extension, the family shall meet all other eligibility
        criteria for Medical Assistance before the alimony income is applied.

        a.      Alimony received will be countable income only if the divorce or legal separation is
                executed on or before December 31, 2018. Alimony will not be countable income if the
                divorce or legal separation is modified or executed on or after January 1, 2019.

8.100.4.J.      Express Lane Eligibility

Express Lane Eligibility shall allow for automatic initiation of Medical Assistance enrollment by using
available data and findings from other programs as listed below.

1.      Free/Reduced Lunch Program

        a.      Recipients of the Free/Reduced Lunch Program who have submitted a Free/Reduced
                Lunch application at a participating school district-

                i)       Families shall be given the option to opt into Medical Assistance coverage for
                         their potentially eligible child.

                ii)      Children who meet all necessary eligibility requirements as outlined in this
                         volume shall be automatically enrolled.

                iii)     Children who meet all necessary eligibility requirements except verification of
                         U.S. citizenship and identity shall receive 90days of eligibility while awaiting this
                         verification.

                iv)      Any additionally required verification shall be requested from the client through
                         CBMS prior to being automatically enrolled.

                v)       Eligibility is based on income declared on the Free/Reduced Lunch application as
                         well as eligibility requirements outlined in this volume.

                vi)      If it would be found that a child does not satisfy an eligibility requirement for
                         Medical Assistance, the child’s eligibility will be evaluated using the Single
                         Streamlined Application for Medical Assistance.




                                                                                                             64
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                             10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


       b.      Recipients of the Free/Reduced Lunch Program who were not required to submit a
               Free/Reduced Lunch application at a participating school district-

               i)       Families who are automatically enrolled Free/Reduced Lunch recipient children
                        shall not be forwarded to the Department for Express Lane Eligibility in
                        compliance USDA confidentiality guidelines.

               ii)      These families must apply for Medical Assistance in order to give consent for
                        request of benefits.

2.     Direct Certification

       a.      Individuals who have submitted a Food Assistance or Colorado Works application

               i)       Families shall be given the option to opt into Medical Assistance coverage for
                        their potentially eligible child.

               ii)      Children who meet all necessary eligibility requirements as outlined throughout
                        8.100.4 shall be automatically enrolled

               iii)     Children who meet all necessary eligibility requirements except verification of
                        U.S. citizenship and identity will receive 90 days of eligibility while awaiting this
                        verification.

               iv)      Any additionally required verification shall be requested from the client through
                        CBMS prior to being automatically enrolled.

               v)       Eligibility is based on income declared on the Food Assistance or Colorado
                        Works application as well as eligibility requirements outlined throughout this
                        volume.

               vi)      If it would be found that a child does not satisfy an eligibility requirement for
                        Medical Assistance, the child’s eligibility shall be evaluated using the Single
                        Streamlined Application for Medical Assistance.

               vii)     Individuals whose eligibility is not determined through Express Lane Eligibility
                        can also submit a separate Single Streamlined Application for Medical
                        Assistance to determine eligibility.

8.100.5.      Aged, Blind, and Disabled, Long Term Care, and Medicare Savings Plan Medical
Assistance General Eligibility

8.100.5.A.     Application Requirements

1.     When an individual applies for Medical Assistance on the basis of disability or blindness, the
       eligibility sites shall take the application and determine whether the individual is eligible for Long
       Term Care or any of the Aged, Blind, and Disabled categories of assistance described in section
       8.100.6. If the applicant does not qualify for Medical Assistance on one of those bases, he/she
       shall be referred to the local Social Security office to apply for SSI.




                                                                                                                65
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                             10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


       a.      Applicants who apply for Long-Term Care Medical Assistance on the basis of disability or
               blindness, or who apply for the Medicaid Buy-In Program for Working Adults with
               Disabilities or the Medicaid Buy-In Program for Children with Disabilities without a current
               disability determination, shall complete a Medical Assistance disability determination
               application in addition to the required Single Streamlined Application. The disability
               determination application is not required for individuals that have already been
               determined disabled by the Social Security Administration.

       b.      The Medical Assistance disability determination application shall be collected by a
               designated eligibility site representative and shall be forwarded to the state disability
               determination contractor upon completion. The state disability determination contractor
               shall conduct a client disability determination and shall forward the determination to the
               designated eligibility site representative.

       c.      For the Medicaid Buy-In Program for Working Adults with Disabilities, if an individual
               does not meet the Social Security Administration definition of disability, the state disability
               determination contractor can review the individual’s circumstances to determine if the
               individual meets limited disability.

       d.      Due to the Coronavirus COVID-19 Public Health Emergency, if a person’s existing
               disability determination has expired, the person shall remain enrolled in Medical
               Assistance until the emergency has ended and the state has processed the verification of
               eligibility, unless the individual requests a voluntary termination of eligibility. At the end of
               the Public Health Emergency a disability determination that has expired will require a new
               disability determination to make a proper determination of eligibility. Members whose
               eligibility has been maintained during the Public Health Emergency will remain in their
               current category until their renewal due month and/or their renewal is processed.

2.     Persons requesting Aged, Blind, and Disabled Medical Assistance need only to complete the
       Single Streamlined Application.

8.100.5.B.     Verification Requirements

1.     The particular circumstances of an applicant will dictate the appropriate documentation needed
       for a complete application. The following items shall be verified for individuals applying for
       Medical Assistance:

       a.      Social Security Number: Each individual requesting assistance on the application shall
               provide a Social Security Number (SSN), or each shall submit proof of an application to
               obtain an SSN, unless they qualify for an exception listed in 8.100.3.I.1.b. Individuals who
               qualify for an exception must not be required to provide an SSN.

               i)      Due to the Coronavirus COVID-19 Public Health Emergency, at application, self-
                       attestation is acceptable for SSN criteria, with the exception of verification of
                       citizenship and immigration status. At the end of the COVID-19 Public Health
                       Emergency, verification for SSN eligibility criteria will be required. Effective May
                       11, 2023 the Coronavirus COVID-19 Public Health Emergency has been
                       declared to end. Members whose eligibility has been maintained during the
                       Public Health Emergency will remain in their current category until their renewal
                       due month and/or their renewal is processed.

                       1)       Applicants who meet the criteria for any categorical Medical Assistance
                                programs, but do not meet the federal and state criteria of citizenship
                                and immigration status are only eligible to receive emergency medical
                                services.




                                                                                                             66
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                       10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


      b.    Verification of citizenship and identity as outlined in the section 8.100.3.H under
            Citizenship and Identity Documentation Requirements.

      c.    Earned income may be self-attested by an applicant or member and verified through an
            electronic data source through the IEVS, FDSH, or the TWN. Individuals who provide
            self-attestation of earned income may also provide a SSN for wage verification purposes.
            If the self-attested earned income cannot be verified electronically due to a missing SSN,
            the applicant must provide documentation of income. Verification of earned income must
            be provided in accordance to the requirements outlined in 8.100.4.B.1.c

            When discrepancies arise between self-attested income and electronic data source
            results, the applicant shall receive a reasonable opportunity to establish his/her financial
            eligibility through the test for reasonable compatibility, by providing a reasonable
            explanation of the discrepancy, or by providing paper documentation within the
            Reasonable Opportunity Period (ROP) of 30 calendar days.

            Income information obtained through an electronic data source shall be considered
            reasonably compatible with income information provided by or on behalf of an applicant
            in the following circumstances:

            i)      If the amount attested by the applicant and the amount reported by an electronic
                    data source are both below the applicable Medical Assistance program income
                    standard, that income shall be determined reasonably compatible and the
                    applicant shall be determined eligible.

            ii)     If the amount attested by the applicant is below the applicable income standard
                    for that program, but the amount reported by the electronic data source is above,
                    and the difference is within the reasonable compatibility threshold percentage of
                    20%, the income shall be determined reasonably compatible and the applicant
                    shall be determined eligible.

            iii)    If both amounts are above the applicable income standard for that program, the
                    income shall be determined reasonably compatible, and the applicant shall
                    continue to be determined eligible during the federal Coronavirus COVID-19
                    Public Health Emergency.

                    Effective May 11, 2023 the Coronavirus COVID-19 Public Health Emergency has
                    been declared to end and the effective policy after May 11, 2023 is if both
                    amounts are above the applicable income standard for that program, the income
                    shall be determined reasonably compatible, and the applicant shall be
                    determined ineligible due to income.

            If income information provided by or on behalf of an applicant is not determined
            reasonably compatible with income information obtained through an electronic data
            source, a reasonable explanation of the discrepancy will not be requested during the
            federal COVID-19 Public Health Emergency. If the applicant does not provide the
            required documentation within the reasonable opportunity period, then the applicant's
            Medical Assistance benefits shall not be terminated during the federal Coronavirus
            COVID-19 Public Health Emergency. When the federal Public Health Emergency has
            ended, a reasonable opportunity period will be given to request proper documentation
            from the member.




                                                                                                       67
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                        10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


            iv)     During the federal Coronavirus COVID-19 Public Health Emergency the
                    Department may request paper documentation when the Department does not
                    find income to be reasonably compatible. If the member does or does not provide
                    paper documentation they will remain eligible during the public health emergency
                    period.

                    Effective May 11, 2023 the Coronavirus COVID-19 Public Health Emergency has
                    been declared to end and the effective policy after May 11, 2023 is the
                    Department may request paper documentation only if the Department does not
                    find income to be reasonably compatible and if the applicant does not provide a
                    reasonable explanation or if electronic data are not available.

            If the applicant is self-employed, ledgers are sufficient for verification of earnings, if a
            ledger is not available, receipts are acceptable. The ledger included in the Medical
            Assistance application is sufficient verification of earnings, unless questionable. If an
            individual cannot provide verification through self-declaration, income shall be verified by
            wage stubs, written documentation from the employer stating the employees' gross
            income or a telephone call to an employer. Applicants may request that communication
            with their employers be made in writing.

            As of CBMS implementation, estimated earned income shall be used to determine
            eligibility if the applicant/client provides less than a full calendar month of wage stubs for
            the application month. A single recent wage stub shall be sufficient if the applicant's
            income is expected to be the same amount for the month of application. Written
            documentation from the employer stating the employees' gross income or a telephone
            call to an employer, if the applicant authorizes the telephone call shall also be acceptable
            verification of earned income. Verification of earned income received during the month
            prior to the month of application shall be acceptable if the application month verification is
            not yet available. Actual earned income shall be used to determine eligibility if the client
            provides verification for the full calendar month.

            v)      During the federal COVID-19 Public Health Emergency, all earned income and
                    self-employment may be reported by self-attestation. The COVID -19 Public
                    Health Emergency ended effective May 11, 2023. At the end of the federal
                    COVID-19 Public Health Emergency, proof of any unverified income shall be
                    provided.

      d.    Verification of all unearned income shall be provided if the unearned income was
            received in the month for which eligibility is being determined or during the previous
            month. If available, information that exists in another case record or verification system
            shall be used to verify unearned income.

            i)      During the federal COVID-19 Public Health Emergency, all unearned income
                    may be reported by self-attestation. The COVID -19 Public Health Emergency
                    ended effective May 11, 2023. At the end of the federal COVID-19 Public Health
                    Emergency, proof of any unverified income shall be provided.

      e.    Verification of all resources shall be provided if the resources were available to the
            applicant in the month for which eligibility is being determined.

            Resource information that is verified through an electronic data source, such as the Asset
            Verification Program, shall be a valid verification. Supplemental physical verifications for
            the same resource is not required unless further information is needed for clarification.




                                                                                                         68
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                            10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


               i)       During the federal COVID-19 Public Health Emergency, all resources may be
                        reported by self-attestation. The COVID -19 Public Health Emergency ended
                        effective May 11, 2023. At the end of the federal COVID-19 Public Health
                        Emergency, proof of any unverified resources shall be provided.

       f.      Immigrant registration cards or papers, if applicable, to determine if the client is eligible
               for full Medical Assistance benefits. If an applicant does not provide this, he/she shall
               only be eligible for emergency Medical Assistance if they meet all other eligibility
               requirements.

       g.      Additional verification-If the requested verification is submitted by the applicant, no other
               additional verification shall be required unless the submitted verification is found to be
               questionable on the basis of fact.

       h.      The determination that information is questionable shall be documented in the applicant's
               case file and CBMS case comments.

8.100.5.C.     Effective Date of Eligibility

1.     Eligibility for the Aged, Blind and Disabled categories shall be approved effective on the later of:

       a.      The first day of the month of the Single Streamlined Application for Medical Assistance;
               or

       b.      The first day of the month the person becomes eligible for Medical Assistance.

2.     The date that eligibility begins for Long-Term Care Medical Assistance is defined in section
       8.100.7.A and B.

3.     For the Medicaid Buy-In Program for Children with Disabilities, any child who is determined to be
       eligible for Medical Assistance at any time during a calendar month shall be eligible for benefits
       during the entire month.

4.     Clients applying for Medical Assistance under the Aged, Blind and Disabled category shall be
       reviewed for retroactive eligibility as described at 8.100.3.E. When reviewing for retroactive
       eligibility for an individual who is SSI eligible or applied and became SSI eligible in each of the
       retroactive months, the applicant must:

       a.      Be aged at least 65 years; or

       b.      Meet the Social Security Administration definition of disability by:

               i)       Being approved as eligible to receive either SSI or SSDI, on or prior to the date
                        of a medical service; or

               ii)      Having a disability onset date determined on or prior to the date of a medical
                        service; and

       c.      Meet the financial requirements as described at 8.100.5.E.

8.100.5.D.     Medical Assistance Estate Recovery Program

1.     The eligibility site shall provide written information from the Department to the following people
       explaining the provisions of the Medical Assistance Estate Recovery Program and how those
       provisions may pertain to the applicant/client:




                                                                                                               69
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                           10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


        a.      Applicants age 55 and older who are institutionalized.

        b.      Applicants/clients who will turn age 55 before their next eligibility re-determination who
                are institutionalized.

        c.      Clients age 55 and older who are approved for admittance to an institution

8.100.5.E.      Availability of Resources and Income

Consistent with the legislative declaration outlined at C.R.S. § 25.5-4-300.4, Medicaid should be the
payer of last resort for payment of medically necessary goods and services furnished to clients. All other
sources of payment, including an individual’s own countable income and resources, should be utilized to
the fullest extent possible before Medicaid is accessed.

1.      Income, which includes earned and unearned income, shall be calculated on a monthly basis
        regardless of whether it is received annually, semi-annually, quarterly or weekly.

2.      For married couples, the income and resources of both spouses are counted in determining
        eligibility for either or both spouses. Refer to section 8.100.7.C for exceptions.

3.      Resources and income shall be considered available when actually available; or, shall be
        deemed available when all of the following apply to the resources or income of the individual or
        individual’s spouse:

        a.      has any ownership interest in income or resources or equity value of a resource;

        b.      has the right, authority, or power to convert the resource or income to cash or to cause
                the resource or income to be converted to cash; and

        c.      is not legally restricted from using the resource or income for his or her support and
                maintenance.

4.      Resources and income shall not be considered unavailable merely because the individual or
        individual’s spouse may need to initiate legal proceedings to access the resources or income.

5.      If the applicant or client demonstrates with clear and convincing evidence that appropriate steps
        are being taken to secure the resources, Medical Assistance shall not be delayed or terminated.
        Verification of efforts to secure the resources must be provided at regular intervals as requested
        by the Eligibility Site.

6.      Resources will be considered available and Medical Assistance shall be denied or terminated if
        the applicant or client refuses or fails to make a reasonable effort to secure potential resources or
        income.

7.      Timely and adequate notice must be given regarding a proposed action to deny, reduce, or
        terminate assistance due to failure to make reasonable efforts to secure resources or income. If
        upon receipt of the prior notice, the individual acts to secure the potential resource, the proposed
        action to deny, reduce, or terminate assistance must be withdrawn, and assistance must be
        approved or continued until the resource or income is, in fact, available.

8.      If the resources or income has been transferred to a trust, the trust shall be submitted for review
        to the Department to determine the effect of the trust on eligibility in accordance with section
        8.100.7.E.




                                                                                                             70
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                           10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


9.      A resource may not necessarily be unavailable by virtue that an individual may be unaware of his
        or her ownership of an asset. The Department will not treat the unknown asset as a resource
        during the period in which the individual was unaware of his/her ownership. However, the value of
        the previously unknown asset, including any monies such as interest that have accumulated on
        the asset through the month of discovery, is evaluated under regular income-counting rules in the
        month of discovery, and the asset is a resource subject to the resource-counting rules following
        the month of discovery.

        a.      The burden is on the individual to prove by clear and convincing evidence that the asset
                was unavailable by virtue of being unknown by the recipient.

        b.      Unknown assets shall not be deemed an overpayment pursuant to Section 8.065 of the
                Department’s regulations where the asset was unknown through no fault of the individual.

        c.      If the previously unknown asset causes the individual to be ineligible, the individual may
                repay the Department from the excess resources to retain Medicaid eligibility.

8.100.5.F.      Income Requirements

1.      This section reviews how income is looked at for the ABD and Long Term Care Medical
        Programs and determining premiums for the Medicaid Buy-In Program for Working Adults with
        Disabilities. For more general income information and income types refer to the Medical
        Assistance General Eligibility Requirements section 8.100.3.

2.      Income for the ABD Medical Programs eligibility is income which is received by an individual or
        family in the month in which they are applying for or receiving Medical Assistance, or the previous
        month if income for the current month is not yet available to determine eligibility.

3.      A self-declared common law spouse retains the same financial responsibility as a legally married
        spouse. Once self-declared as married under the common law, financial responsibility remains
        unless legal separation or divorce occurs. If two persons live together, but are not married to each
        other, neither one has the legal responsibility to support the other. This is not changed by the fact
        that the unmarried individuals may share a common child.

4.      Earned income is countable as income in the month received and a countable resource the
        following month. Earned Income includes the following:

        a.      Wages, which include salaries, commissions, bonuses, severance pay, and any other
                special payments received because of employment;

        b.      Net earnings from self-employment;

        c.      Payments for services performed in a sheltered workshop or work activities center;

        d.      Certain Royalties and honoraria.

5.      Unearned income is the gross amount received in cash or kind that is not earned from
        employment or self-employment.

        Unearned income is countable as income in the month received and any unspent amount is a
        countable resource the following month. Unearned income includes, but is not limited to, the
        following:

        a.      Death benefits, reduced by the cost of last illness and burial;




                                                                                                          71
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                         10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


      b.      Prizes and awards;

      c.      Gifts and inheritances;

      d.      Interest payments on promissory notes established on or after March 1, 2007;

      e.      Interest or dividend payments received from any resources;

      f.      Lump sum payments from workers’ compensation, insurance settlements, etc.

      g.      Dividends, royalties or other payments from mineral rights or other resources listed for
              sale within the resource limits

      h.      Income from annuities that meet requirements for exclusion as a resource

      i       Lottery/Gambling winnings

              1)      An applicant/member may request a hardship exemption when denied/or
                      terminated due to Lottery/Gambling winnings.

                      a.      The applicant/member must demonstrate a severe medical or financial
                              hardship, as determined by the Department.

                      b.      The applicant/member must provide a written request and
                              documentation to their County Department of Human Services, within 30
                              calendar days from the date of their denial or termination notice.

      j.      Pensions and other period payments, such as:

              i)      Private pensions or disability benefits;

              ii)     Social Security benefits (Retirement, survivors, and disability);

              iii)    Workers' Compensation payments;

              iv)     Railroad retirement annuities;

              v)      Unemployment insurance payments;

              vi)     Veterans benefits other than Aid and Attendance (A&A) and Unusual Medical
                      Expenses (UME);and

              vii)    Alimony and support payments.

      k.      Support and maintenance in kind - The support and maintenance in kind amount should
              not be greater than one third of the Federal Benefit Rate (FBR). Use the Presumed
              Maximum Value (PMV) of 1/3 of the recipient’s portion of the rent to determine the
              support and maintenance in kind amount. Use one third of the FBR if an amount is not
              declared by the client.

6.    For the purpose of determining eligibility for the Long Term Care and Aged, Blind, and Disabled
      Medical Assistance categories the following shall be exempt from consideration as either income
      or resources:




                                                                                                         72
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                       10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


      a.    A bona fide loan. Bona fide loans are loans, either private or commercial, which have a
            repayment agreement. Declaration of such loans is sufficient verification.

      b.    Benefits received under Title VII, Nutrition Program for the Elderly, of the Older
            Americans Act.

      c.    Title XVI (SSI) or Title II (Retirement Survivors or Disability Insurance) retroactive
            payments (lump sum) for nine months following receipt and the remainder countable as a
            resource thereafter.

      d.    The value of supplemental food assistance received under the special food services
            program for children provided for in the National School Lunch Act and under the Child
            Nutrition Act, including benefits received from the special supplemental food program for
            women, infants and children (WIC).

      e.    Home produce utilized for personal consumption.

      f.    Payments received under Title II of the Uniform Relocation Assistance and Real Property
            Acquisition Policies Act; relocation payments to a displaced homeowner toward the
            purchase of a replacement dwelling are considered exempt for up to 6 months.

      g.    The value of any assistance paid with respect to a dwelling unit is excluded from income
            and resources if paid under:

            i)      Experimental Housing Allowance Program (EHAP) payments made by HUD
                    under section 23 of the U.S. Housing Act.

            ii)     The United States Housing Act of 1937 (§ 1437 et seq. of 42 U.S.C.);

            iii)    The National Housing Act (§ 1701 et seq. of 12 U.S.C.);

            iv)     Section 101 of the Housing and Urban Development Act of 1965 (§ 1701s of 12
                    U.S.C., § 1451 of 42 U.S.C.);

            v)      Title V of the Housing Act of 1949 (§ 1471 et seq. of 42 U.S.C.); or

            vi)     Section 202(h) of the Housing Act of 1959.

      h.    Payments made from Indian judgment funds and tribal funds held in trust by the
            Secretary of the Interior and/or distributed per capita; and initial purchases made with
            such funds. (Public Law No 98-64 and Public Law No. 97-458).

      i.    Distributions from a native corporation formed pursuant to the Alaska Native Claims
            Settlement Act (ANCSA) which are in the form of: cash payments up to an amount not to
            exceed $ 2000 per individual per calendar year; stock; a partnership interest; or an
            interest in a settlement trust. Cash payments, up to $ 2000, received by a client in one
            calendar year which is retained into subsequent years is excluded as income and
            resources; however, cash payments up to $ 2000 received in the subsequent year would
            be excluded from income in the month(s) received but counted as a resource if retained
            beyond that month(s).

      j.    Assistance from other agencies and organizations.




                                                                                                       73
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                       10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


      k.    Major disaster and emergency assistance provided to individuals and families, and
            comparable disaster assistance provided to states, local governments and disaster
            assistance organizations shall be exempt as income and resources in determining
            eligibility for Medical Assistance.

      l.    Payments received for providing foster care.

      m.    Payments to volunteers serving as foster grandparents, senior health aids, or senior
            companions, and to persons serving in the Service Corps of Retired Executives (SCORE)
            and Active Corps of Executives (ACE) and any other program under Title I (VISTA) when
            the value of all such payments adjusted to reflect the number of hours such volunteers
            are serving is not equivalent to or greater than the minimum wage, and Title II and Title III
            of the Domestic Volunteer Services Act.

      n.    The benefits provided to eligible persons or households through the Low Income Energy
            Assistance (LEAP) Program.

      o.    Training allowances granted by the Workforce Investment Act (WIA) to enable any
            individual whether dependent child or caretaker relative, to participate in a training
            program

      p.    Payments received from the youth incentive entitlement pilot projects, the youth
            community conservation and improvement projects, and the youth employment and
            training programs under the Youth Employment and Demonstration Project Act.

      q.    Social Security benefit payments and the accrued amount thereof to a client when an
            individual plan for self-care and/or self-support has been developed. In order to disregard
            such income and resources, it shall be determined that (1) SSI permits such disregard
            under such developed plan for self-care-support goal, and (2) assurance exists that the
            funds involved will not be for purposes other than those intended.

      r.    Monies received pursuant to the “Civil Liberties Act of 1988” P.L. No. 100-383, (by
            eligible persons of Japanese ancestry or certain specified survivors, and certain eligible
            Aleuts).

      s.    Payments made from the Agent Orange Settlement Fund or any fund established
            pursuant to the settlement in the In Re Agent Orange product liability litigation, M.D.L. No
            381 (E.D.N.Y).

      t.    A child receiving subsidized adoption funds shall be excluded from the Medical
            Assistance budget unit and his income shall be exempt from consideration in determining
            eligibility, unless such exclusion results in ineligibility for the other members of the
            household.

      u.    The Earned Income Tax Credit (EIC). EIC shall also be exempt as resources for the
            month it is received and for the following month.

      v.    Any money received from the Radiation Exposure Compensation Trust Fund, Including
            the Energy Employees Occupational Illness Compensation Program Act, pursuant to P.L.
            No. 101-426 as amended by P.L. No. 101-510.

      w.    Reimbursement or restoration of out-of-pocket expenses. Out-of-pocket expenses are
            actual expenses for food, housing, medical items, clothing, transportation, or personal
            needs items.




                                                                                                      74
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                          10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


       x.      Payments to individuals because of their status as victims of Nazi persecution pursuant
               to Public Law No. 103-286.

       y.      General Assistance, SSI, OAP-A and cash assistance under the Temporary Assistance
               to Needy Families (TANF) funds.

       z.      All wages paid by the United States Census Bureau for temporary employment related to
               the decennial Census.

       aa.     Any grant or loan to an undergraduate student for educational purposes made or insured
               under any programs administered by the Commissioner of Education (Basic Education
               Opportunity Grants, Supplementary Education Opportunity Grants, National Direct
               Student Loans and Guaranteed Student Loans), Pell Grant Program, the PLUS Program,
               the BYRD Honor Scholarship programs and the College Work Study Program.

       bb.     Any portion of educational loans and grants obtained and used under conditions that
               preclude their use for current living cost (need-based).

       cc.     Financial assistance received under the Carl D. Perkins Vocational and Applied
               Technology Education Act that is made available for attendance cost shall not be
               considered as income or resources. Attendance cost includes tuition, fees, rental or
               purchase of equipment, materials or supplies required of all students in the same course
               of study, books, supplies, transportation, dependent care and miscellaneous personal
               expenses of students attending the institution on at least a half-time basis, as determined
               by the institution.

       dd.     The additional unemployment compensation of $25 a week enacted through the
               American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009.

8.100.5.G.     Deeming Of Income And Resources For The OAP Program

1.     All aliens who apply for OAP on or after April 16, 1988, for three years after the date of admission
       into the United States, shall have the income and resources of their sponsors other than relatives
       deemed for their care. Refer to the Medical Assistance General Eligibility Requirements section
       8.100.3.K for specific information on deeming of income and resources.

8.100.5.H.     Income Allocations and Disregards

1.     The following income allocations and disregards are only applicable to SSI related, OAP,
       Medicare Savings Programs (MSP), the Medicaid Buy-In Program for Children with Disabilities
       and the Medicaid Buy-In Program for Working Adults with Disabilities.

       These allocations and disregards are not applicable to the HCBS waivers or the LTC programs.

       For the Medicaid Buy-In Program for Working Adults with Disabilities, the applicant’s spouse’s
       income does not count toward the applicant.

       a.      Income of spouses living together is considered mutually available for SSI related, OAP,
               and Medicare Savings Programs (MSP).

       b.      For a person living in the household of another and not paying shelter costs, one third of
               the Federal Benefit Rate (FBR) is counted as in-kind income and is added to the
               countable income. This does not apply to unemancipated children.




                                                                                                         75
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                            10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


2.    For the purposes of this rule, the following definitions apply:

      a.      unemancipated child is:

              i)       a child under age 18 who is living in the same household with a parent or spouse
                       of a parent, or

              ii)      a child under age 21 who is living in the same household with a parent or spouse
                       of a parent, if the child is regularly attending a school, college, or university, or is
                       receiving technical training designed to prepare the child for gainful employment.

      b.      Ineligible child is a child who is not applying or eligible for SSI.

      c.      Ineligible parent/spouse is a parent or spouse who is not applying or eligible for SSI.

3.    Countable income is calculated by reducing the gross income by the following allocations and
      disregards.

      a.      Income allocations are the part of the gross income that is allocated to individuals in the
              home who are not eligible for Supplemental Security Income or Old Age Pension. The
              allocation reduces the gross income that is deemed available to the applicant/client. The
              allocation is deducted from the gross income prior to applying the other disregards.

      The allocations are:

              i)       An Ineligible Child Allocation is an amount equal to one half the current year’s
                       SSI FBR that is disregarded from the ineligible parents’ gross income. This
                       allocation is used to meet the needs of ineligible children in the household. This
                       allocation is available for each ineligible child in the home. The amount of the
                       allocation is reduced by any of the ineligible child’s own income.

              ii)      An Ineligible Parent(s) Allocation is an amount equal to the current year’s SSI
                       FBR for a single individual or a couple, as applicable. This amount is used to
                       meet the needs of the ineligible parent(s) in the home with an applicant/client
                       child.

              iii)     No allocations are allowed for applicant/recipient spouses who do not have
                       children in the home.

      b.      Allocations are applied to the income in the following manner:

              i)       Allocation disregards are deducted from unearned income before earned income.

              ii)      Ineligible child allocation disregards are deducted from parents’ income before
                       any standard disregards are applied.

              iii)     Ineligible parent(s) allocation disregards are deducted after any ineligible child
                       allocation disregards and after the standard income disregards.

4.    Income disregards

      a.      $20 General Income Disregard

              If there is unearned income left after the Ineligible Child and Parent(s) Allocation
              Disregards are applied, a General Income Disregard of $20 shall be applied as follows:




                                                                                                            76
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                            10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


                i)      The first $20 of total available unearned income (except for SSI income) must be
                        disregarded. The remaining amount of unearned income is countable.

                ii)     If the client has less than $20 of unearned income, the difference between the
                        gross unearned income and the $20 deduction shall be applied as an earned
                        income disregard, if applicable.

                iii)    Only one $20 general income disregard is allowed per couple and is divided
                        between the two spouses. If one of the spouses has no income the other spouse
                        shall get the full $20 disregard.

        b.      $65 Plus One Half Remainder Earned Income Disregard

                i)      If there is earned income left after the Ineligible Child and Parent(s) Allocation
                        Disregards are applied:

                        1)      Deduct the first $65 of all earned income.

                        2)      Divide the remaining income in half.

                        3)      The result is the amount of earned income used for determining
                                eligibility.

        c.      Child support received by an applicant/recipient child is reduced by one third of the total
                child support payment. This reduction does not apply to ineligible children when
                calculating the ineligible child allocation disregard.

        d.      The first $400 of the gross monthly earned income is exempt for a blind or disabled child
                who is a student that is regularly attending school. The exemption cannot exceed $1,620
                in a calendar year.

        e.      Title 20 of the Code of Federal Regulations, § 416.1112 (2012) is hereby incorporated by
                reference into this rule. Such incorporation, however, excludes later amendments to or
                editions of the referenced material. These regulations are available for public inspection
                at the Department of Health Care Policy and Financing, 303 E 17th Ave, Denver, CO
                80203. Certified copies of incorporated materials are provided at cost upon request.

8.100.5.I.      Determining Ownership of Income

1.      If payment is made solely to one individual, the income shall be considered available income to
        that individual.

2.      If payment is made to more than one individual, the income shall be considered available to each
        individual in proportion to their interests.

3.      In case of a married couple in which there is no document establishing specific ownership
        interests, one-half of the income shall be considered available to each spouse.

4.      Income from the Community Spouse's Monthly Income Allowance, as defined in the spousal
        protection rules in this volume at 8.100.7.R, is income to the community spouse.

8.100.5.J.      Income-Producing Property

1.      Net rental income from an exempt home or a life estate interest in an exempt home is countable
        after the following allowable deductions:




                                                                                                             77
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                           10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


        a.      Property taxes and insurance

        b.      Necessary reasonable routine maintenance expenses

        c.      Reasonable management fee for a professional property manager.

2.      Non-business property that is necessary to produce goods or services essential to self- support is
        excluded up to $6,000.

3.      Property used in a trade or business which is essential to self-support is excluded up to a limit of
        $6,000 if it produces 6% return of the $6,000 excluded value.

8.100.5.K.      Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Payments

The portion of the pension payments for Aid and Attendance (A&A) and Unusual Medical Expenses
(UME), as determined by the VA, shall not be considered as income when determining eligibility.

1.      The portion of the pension payments for Aid and Attendance (A&A) and Unusual Medical
        Expenses (UME), as determined by the VA, shall not be used as patient payment to the medical
        facility:

        a.      for a veteran or surviving spouse of a veteran in a medical facility other than State
                Veterans Home; or

        b.      for a veteran or surviving spouse of a veteran in a State Veterans Home with
                dependents.

2.      For a veteran or surviving spouse of a veteran in a State Veterans Home with no dependents the
        portion of the pension payments for Aid and Attendance (A&A) and Unusual Medical Expenses
        (UME), as determined by the VA, shall be used as patient payment to the medical facility.

8.100.5.L.      Reverse Mortgages

1.      In accordance with C.R.S. § 11-38-110, reverse mortgages payments made to a borrower shall
        not be treated as income for eligibility purposes.

2.      Funds remaining the following month after the payment is made will be countable as a resource.

3.      Any payments from a reverse mortgage that are transferred to another individual without fair
        consideration shall be analyzed in accordance with the rules on transfers without fair
        consideration in the Long-Term Care section and may result in a penalty period of ineligibility.




                                                                                                           78
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                          10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board



8.100.5.M.     Resource Requirements

1.     Consideration of resources: Resources are defined as cash or other assets or any real or
       personal property that an individual or spouse owns. The resource limit for an individual is
       $2,000. For a married couple, the resource limit is $3,000. If one spouse is institutionalized, refer
       to Spousal Protection-Treatment of Income and Resources for Institutionalized Spouses.
       Effective January 1, 2011, the resource limits for the Qualified Medicare Beneficiaries (QMB),
       Specified Low Income Medicare Beneficiaries (SLMB), and Qualified Individuals 1 (QI-1)
       programs are $8,180 for a single individual and $13,020 for a married individual living with a
       spouse and no other dependents. The resource limits for the QMB, SLMB, and QI programs shall
       be adjusted annually by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services on January 1 of each
       year. These resource limits are based upon the change in the annual consumer price index (CPI)
       as of September of the previous year. Resources are not counted for the Medicaid Buy-In
       Program for Working Adults with Disabilities or the Medicaid Buy-In Program for Children with
       Disabilities.

2.     The following resources are exempt in determining eligibility:

       a.      A home, which is any property in which an individual or spouse of an individual has an
               ownership interest and which serves as the individual’s principal place of residence. The
               property includes the shelter in which an individual resides, the land on which the shelter
               is located and related outbuildings.

               i)      Only one principal place of residence is excluded for a single individual or a
                       married couple.

               ii)     The individual’s ownership interest in the home must have an equity value that:

                       1)       From January 1, 2006 thru December 31, 2010 is $500,000 or less, or;

                       2)       Is less than the amount that results from the year to year percentage
                                increase to the $500,000 limit. The increase is based upon the consumer
                                price index for all urban consumers (all items; United States city
                                average), rounded to the nearest $1,000.

               iii)    If an individual or spouse of an individual owns a home of any value located
                       outside Colorado, and if the individual intends to return to that home, then the
                       individual does not meet the residency requirement for Colorado Medicaid
                       eligibility.

               iv)     If an individual or spouse of an individual owns a home of any value located
                       outside Colorado, and if the individual does not intend to return to that home,
                       then the home is a countable resource unless the individual’s spouse or
                       dependent relative lives in the home.

               v)      If an individual or spouse of an individual owns a home located inside Colorado
                       with an equity value lower than the limit in subparagraph (1), above, and if the
                       individual intends to return to that home, then the home is considered an exempt
                       resource if:

                       1)       The individual is institutionalized; and

                       2)       The intent to return home is documented in writing.




                                                                                                          79
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                          10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


            vi)     If an individual or spouse of an individual owns a home with an equity value
                    greater than the limit that is located inside Colorado, and if the individual intends
                    to return to that home, then the home is considered to be a countable resource
                    unless spouse or dependent relative lives in the home.

            vii)    If an individual or spouse of an individual owns a home of any value located
                    inside Colorado, and if the individual does not intend to return to that home, then
                    the home is a countable resource unless spouse or dependent relative lives in
                    the home.

            viii)   If an individual or spouse moves out of his or her home without the intent to
                    return, the home becomes a countable resource because it is no longer the
                    individual's principal place of residence.

            ix)     If an individual leaves his or her home to live in an institution, the home shall still
                    be considered the principal place of residence, irrespective of the individual's
                    intent to return as long as the individual's spouse or dependent relative continues
                    to live there.

            x)      The individual's equity in the former home becomes a countable resource
                    effective with the first day of the month following the month it is no longer his or
                    her principal place of residence.

            xi)     The intent to return home applies to the home in which the individual or spouse
                    of the individual was living prior to being institutionalized or to a replacement
                    home as long as the individual’s spouse or dependent relative continues to live in
                    the home.

            xii)    The intent to return home also applies if the individual is living in an assisted
                    living facility or alternative care facility and receives HCBS while in that facility or
                    transfers into a Long-Term Care institution to receive services.

            xiii)   For an individual in a Long-Term Care institution, receiving HCBS, or enrolled in
                    PACE, the exemption for the principal place of residence does not apply to a
                    residence which has been transferred to a trust or other entity, such as a
                    partnership or corporation.

                    1)      The exemption shall be regained if the residence is transferred back into
                            the name of the individual.

            xiv)    The principal place of residence, which is subject to estate recovery, becomes a
                    countable resource upon the execution and recording of a beneficiary deed.

                    The exemption can be regained if a revocation of the beneficiary deed is
                    executed and recorded.

      b.    Excess property will not be included in countable resources as long as reasonable efforts
            to sell it have been unsuccessful. Reasonable efforts to sell means:

            i.)     The property is listed with a professional such as a real estate agent, broker,
                    dealer, auction house, etc., at current market value.

            ii)     If owner listed, the property must be for sale at current market value, advertised
                    and shown to the public.




                                                                                                           80
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                         10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


            iii)    Any reasonable offer must be accepted.

            iv)     If an offer is received that is at least two-thirds of the current market value, that
                    offer is presumed reasonable.

            v)      The client must continue reasonable efforts to sell and must submit verification of
                    these efforts to the Eligibility Site on a quarterly basis. Reasonable effort is at
                    Eligibility Site discretion.

            vi)     If the exemption is used to become eligible under the Spousal Protection rules,
                    the property shall continue to be viewed according to 8.100.7.L while efforts to
                    sell it are being made.

            vii)    Eligibility under this exemption is conditional. Once the property sells, the client
                    shall be ineligible until the resources are below the prescribed limit.

      c.    One automobile is totally excluded regardless of its value if it is used for transportation for
            the individual or a member of the individual's household. An automobile includes, in
            addition to passenger cars, other vehicles used to provide necessary transportation.

      d.    Household goods are not counted as a resource to an individual (and spouse, if any) if
            they are:

            i)      Items of personal property, found in or near the home, that are used on a regular
                    basis; or

            ii)     Items needed by the household for maintenance, use and occupancy of the
                    premises as a home.

            iii)    Such items include but are not limited to: furniture, appliances, electronic
                    equipment such as personal computers and television sets, carpets, cooking and
                    eating utensils, and dishes.

      e.    Personal effects are not counted as a resource to an individual (and spouse, if any) if
            they are:

            i)      Items of personal property ordinarily worn or carried by the individual; or

            ii)     Articles otherwise having an intimate relation to the individual.

            iii)    Such items include but are not limited to: personal jewelry including wedding and
                    engagement rings, personal care items, prosthetic devices, and educational or
                    recreational items such as books or musical instruments.

            iv)     Items of cultural or religious significance to the individual and items required
                    because of an individual’s impairment are also not counted as a resource.

      f.    The cash surrender value of all life insurance policies owned by an individual and
            spouse, if any, is exempt if the total face value of all life insurance policies does not
            exceed $1,500 on any person. If the total face value of all the life insurance policies
            exceeds $1,500 on one person, the cash surrender value of those policies will be
            counted.




                                                                                                            81
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                            10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


      g.      Term life insurance having no cash surrender value, and burial insurance, the proceeds
              of which can be used only for burial expenses, are not countable toward the resource
              limit.

      h.      The total value of burial spaces for the applicant/recipient, his/her spouse and any other
              members of his/her immediate family is exempt as a resource. If any interest is earned on
              the value of an agreement for the purchase of a burial space, such interest is also
              exempt.

      i.      An applicant or recipient may own burial funds through an irrevocable trust or other
              irrevocable arrangement which are available for burial and are held in an irrevocable
              burial contract, an irrevocable burial trust, or in an irrevocable trust which is specifically
              identified as available for burial expenses without such funds affecting the person's
              eligibility for assistance.

      j.      An applicant or recipient may also own up to $1,500 in burial funds through a revocable
              account, trust, or other arrangement for burial expenses, without such funds affecting the
              person's eligibility for assistance. This exclusion only applies if the funds set aside for
              burial expenses are kept separate from all other resources not intended for burial of the
              individual or spouse's burial expenses. Interest on the burial funds is also excluded if left
              to accumulate in the burial fund. For a married couple, a separate $1,500 exemption
              applies to each spouse.

              The $1,500 exemption is reduced by:

              i)      the amount of any irrevocable burial funds such as are described in the
                      preceding subparagraph, and

              ii)     the face value of any life insurance policy whose cash surrender value is exempt.

      k.      Achieving a Better Life Experience (ABLE) Accounts.

3.    Countable resources include the following:

      a.      Cash;

      b.      Funds held by a financial institution in a checking or savings account, certificate of
              deposit or money market account;

      c.      Current market value of stocks, bonds, and mutual funds;

      d.      All funds in a joint account are presumed to be a resource of the applicant or client. If
              there is more than one applicant or client account holder, it is presumed that the funds in
              the account belong to those individuals in equal shares. To rebut this presumption,
              evidence must be furnished that proves that some or all of the funds in a jointly held
              account do not belong to him or her. To rebut the sole ownership presumption, the
              following procedure must be followed:

              i)      Submit statements from all of the account holders regarding who owns the funds,
                      why there is a joint account, who has made deposits and withdrawals, and how
                      withdrawals have been spent.

              ii)     Submit account records showing deposits, withdrawals and interest in the
                      months for which ownership of funds is at issue.




                                                                                                               82
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                       10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


            iii)    Correct the account title and submit revised account records showing that the
                    applicant or client is no longer an account holder or separate the funds to show
                    they are solely owned by the individual within 45 days.

      e.    Any real property that is subject to a recorded beneficiary deed and on which an estate
            recovery claim can be made.

      f.    For applications filed on or after January 1, 2006, an individual’s home if the individual’s
            equity interest in the home exceeds the equity value limit described at 8.100.5.M.2.a.i)1).

      g.    Real property not exempt as the principal place of residence and not exempt as income
            producing property with a value of $6,000 or less, as described at 8.100.5.J.

      h.    When the applicant alleges that the sale of real property would cause undue hardship to
            the co-owner due to loss of housing, all of the following information must be obtained:

            i)      The applicant or client's signed statement to that effect.

            ii)     Verification of joint ownership.

            iii)    A statement from the co-owner verifying the following:

                    1)      The property is used as his principal place of residence.

                    2)      The co-owner would have to move if the property were sold.

                    3)      The co-owner would be unable to buy the applicant or client's interest in
                            the property.

                    4)      There is no other readily available residence because there is no other
                            affordable housing available or no other housing with the necessary
                            modifications for the co-owner if he is a person with disabilities.

      i.    Personal property such as a mobile home or trailer or the like, that is not exempt as a
            principal place of residence or that is not income producing.

      j.    Personal effects acquired or held for their value or as an investment. Such items can
            include but are not limited to: gems, jewelry that is not worn or held for family
            significance, or collectibles.

      k.    The equity value of all automobiles that are in addition to one exempt vehicle.

      l.    The cash surrender value of all life insurance policies owned by an individual and spouse
            is counted if the total face value of all the policies combined exceeds $1,500 on any
            person.

      m.    Promissory notes established before April 1, 2006 are treated as follows:

            i)      The fair market value of a promissory note, mortgage, installment contract or
                    similar instrument is an available countable resource.




                                                                                                       83
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                       10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


            ii)     In order to determine the fair market value, the applicant shall obtain three
                    estimates of fair market value from a private note broker, who is engaged in the
                    business of purchasing such notes. In order to obtain the estimates and locate
                    willing buyers, the note shall be advertised in a newspaper with state wide
                    circulation under business or investment opportunities.

            iii)    A note or similar instrument which transferred funds or assets for less than fair
                    consideration shall be considered as a transfer for less than fair consideration
                    and a period of ineligibility shall be imposed.

      n.    Promissory notes established on or after April 1, 2006 and before March 1, 2007 are
            treated as follows:

            i)      The value of a promissory note, loan or mortgage is an available countable
                    resource unless the note, loan or mortgage:

                    1)      Has a repayment term that is actuarially sound based on the individual’s
                            life expectancy, found in the tables at 8.100.7.J, for annuities purchased
                            on or after February 8, 2006;

                    2)      Provides for payments to be made in equal amounts during the term of
                            the loan, with no deferral and no balloon payments made; and

                    3)      Prohibits the cancellation of the balance upon the death of the lender.

            ii)     The value of a promissory note, loan or mortgage which does not meet the
                    criteria in outlined in 8.100.5.M.3.n.i)1)-3) is the outstanding balance due as of
                    the date of the individual’s application for HCBS, PACE or institutional services
                    and is subject to the transfer of assets without fair consideration provisions as
                    outlined in section 8.100.7.F.

      o.    Promissory notes established on or after March 1, 2007 are treated as follows:

            i)      The value of a promissory note, loan or mortgage is the outstanding balance due
                    as of the date of the individual’s application for HCBS, PACE or institutional
                    services and is an available countable resource, and

            ii)     A promissory note, loan or mortgage which does not meet the following criteria
                    shall be considered to be a transfer without fair consideration and shall be
                    subject to the provisions outlined at 8.100.7.F.

                    1)      Has a repayment term that is actuarially sound based on the individual’s
                            life expectancy as found in the tables in section 8.100.7.J for annuities
                            purchased on or after February 8, 2006;

                    2)      Provides for payments to be made in equal amounts during the term of
                            the loan, with no deferral and no balloon payments made; and

                    3)      Prohibits the cancellation of the balance upon the death of the lender.

      p.    Mineral rights represent ownership interest in natural resources such as coal, oil, or
            natural gas, which normally are extracted from the ground.




                                                                                                         84
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                            10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


               i)       Ownership of land and mineral rights. If the individual owns the land to which the
                        mineral rights pertain, the current market value of the land generally includes the
                        value of the mineral rights.

               ii)      If the individual does not own the land to which the mineral rights pertain, the
                        individual should obtain a current market value estimate from a knowledgeable
                        source. Such sources may include:

                        1)      any mining company that holds leases;

                        2)      the Bureau of Land Management;

                        3)      the U.S. Geological Survey.

8.100.5.N.     Treatment of Self-Funded Retirement Accounts

1.     The following regulations apply to self-funded retirement accounts such as an Individual
       Retirement Account (IRA), Keogh Plan, 401(k), 403(b) and any other self-funded retirement
       account.

2.     Self-funded retirement accounts in the name of the applicant are countable as a resource to the
       applicant.

3.     Self-funded retirement accounts in the name of the applicant's spouse who is living with the
       applicant are exempt in determining eligibility for the applicant, except as set forth in 4. below.

4.     Self-funded retirement accounts in the name of a community spouse who is married to an
       applicant who is applying for Long Term Care in a Long Term Care institution, HCBS or PACE,
       are countable as a resource to the applicant and may be included in the Community Spouse
       Resource Allowance (CSRA) up to the maximum amount allowable. The terms community
       spouse and CSRA are further defined in the regulations on Spousal Protection in this volume.

5.     The value of a self-funded retirement account is determined as follows:

       a.      The gross value of the account, less any taxes due, is the amount that is countable as a
               resource, regardless of whether any monthly income is being received from the account.

       b.      If the applicant is not able to provide the amount of taxes that are due, the value shall be
               determined by deducting 20% from the gross value of the account.

8.100.5.O.     Treatment of Inheritances

1.     An inheritance is cash, other liquid resources, non-cash items, or any right in real or personal
       property received at the death of another.

2.     If an Individual or individual’s spouse is the beneficiary of a will, the inheritance is presumed to be
       available at the conclusion of the probate process or within 6 months if the estate is not in
       probate.

3.     If an individual or individual’s spouse is eligible for a family allowance in a probate proceeding,
       that allowance will be considered available three months after death or when actually available,
       whichever is sooner.

4.     Evidence demonstrating that the inheritance is not available due to probate or other legal
       restrictions must be provided to rebut the presumption.




                                                                                                             85
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                              10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


8.100.5.P.        Treatment of Proceeds from Disposition of Resources

Treatment of proceeds from disposition of resources is determined as follows:

1.        The net proceeds from the sale of exempt or non-exempt resources are considered available
          resources.

2.        The net proceeds are the selling price less any valid encumbrances and costs of sale.

3.        After deducting any amount necessary to raise the individual's and spouse's resources to the
          applicable limits, the balance of the net proceeds, in excess of the resource limits, shall be
          considered available resources. In lieu of terminating eligibility due to excess resources, the client
          may request that the proceeds be used to reimburse the Medical Assistance Program for
          previous payments for Medical Assistance.

4.        The proceeds from the sale of an exempt home will be excluded to the extent they are intended
          to be used and are, in fact, used to purchase another home in which the individual, a spouse or
          dependent child resides, within three months of the date of the sale of the home.

8.100.6           Aged, Blind, and Disabled Medical Assistance Eligibility

8.100.6.A.        Aged, Blind, and Disabled (ABD) General Information

1.        Medical Assistance for ABD includes SSI eligible individuals, OAP recipients, and the Medicare
          Savings Program (MSP) individuals. Refer to section 8.100.5 of this volume for income and
          resource criteria for these categories of assistance.

8.100.6.B.        Disability Determinations

1.        Beginning on July 1, 2001, the Department or its contractor shall determine whether the client is
          disabled or blind in accordance with the requirements and procedures set forth elsewhere in this
          volume and according to Federal regulations regarding disability determinations.

2.        A client who disagrees with the decision on disability or blindness shall have the right to appeal
          that decision to a state-level fair hearing in accordance with the procedures at 8.057.

8.100.6.C.        SSI Eligibles

1.        Benefits of the Colorado Medical Assistance Program must be provided to the following:

          a.      persons receiving financial assistance under SSI;

          b.      persons who are eligible for financial assistance under SSI, but are not receiving SSI;

          c.      persons receiving SSI payments based on presumptive eligibility for SSI pending final
                  determination of disability or blindness; and persons receiving SSI payments based on
                  conditional eligibility for SSI pending disposal of excess resources.

2.        The Department has entered into an agreement with SSA in which SSA shall determine Medical
          Assistance for all SSI applicants. Medical Assistance shall be provided to all individuals receiving
          SSI benefits as determined by SSA to be eligible for Medical Assistance.

3.        The eligibility sites shall have access to a weekly unmatched listing of all individuals newly
          approved and a weekly SSI-Cases Denied or Discontinued listing. These lists shall include the
          necessary information for the eligibility site to authorize Medical Assistance.




                                                                                                               86
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                                10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


4.     Medical Assistance shall not be delayed due to the necessity to contact the SSI recipient and
       obtain third party medical resources.

5.     Notification shall be sent to the SSI recipient advising him/her of the approval of Medical
       Assistance.

6.     The SISC Code for this type of assistance is B.

7.     Denied or terminated Medical Assistance based on a denial or termination of SSI which is later
       overturned, must be approved from the original SSI eligibility date.

8.     Individuals who remain eligible as SSI recipients but are not receiving SSI payments shall receive
       Medical Assistance benefits. This group includes persons whose SSI payments are being
       withheld as a means of recovering an overpayment, whose checks are undeliverable due to
       change of address or representative payee, and persons who lost SSI financial assistance due to
       earned income.

9.     If the eligibility site obtains information affecting the eligibility of these SSI recipients, they shall
       forward such information to the local Social Security office.

10.    For individuals under 21 years of age who are eligible for or who are receiving SSI, the effective
       date of Medicaid eligibility shall be the date on which the individual applied for SSI or the date on
       which the individual became eligible for SSI, whichever is later.

       a.       Special Provisions for Infants

                i)       For an infant who is eligible for or who is receiving SSI, the effective date of
                         Medicaid eligibility shall be the infant’s date of birth if:

                         1)       the infant was born in a hospital;

                         2)       the disability onset date, as reported by the Social Security
                                  Administration, occurred during the infant’s hospital stay; and

                         3)       the infant’s date of birth is within three (3) months of the date on which
                                  the infant became eligible for SSI

8.100.6.D.      Pickle Amendment

1.     Beginning July 1977, Medical Assistance must be provided to an individual if their countable
       income is below the current years SSI standard after a cost of living adjustment (COLA) disregard
       is applied to their OASDI (excluding Railroad Retirement Benefits) and they meet all other
       eligibility criteria. This is referred to as Pickle Disregard.

2.     The Pickle Disregard applies to an individual who:

       a.       lost SSI and/or OAP because of a cost of living adjustment to his/her own OASDI
                benefits.

       b.       lost SSI and/or OAP because a cost of living adjustment to OASDI income deemed from
                a parent or spouse.

       c.       lost OAP and/or SSI due to the receipt of, or increase to, OASDI, and would be eligible
                for OAP and/or SSI if all COLA’S on the amount that caused them to lose eligibility is
                disregarded from their current OASDI amount.




                                                                                                                   87
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                             10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


8.100.6.E.      Pickle Determination

1.      To determine eligibility of Medical Assistance recipients to whom the Pickle disregards apply, the
        eligibility site must:

        a.      establish whether the person was eligible for SSI or OAP and, for the same month, was
                entitled to OASDI;

        b.      determine the previous amount of the OASDI that caused them to lose SSI and/or OAP;

        c.      determine the current OASDI income;

        d.      subtract the previous OASDI income from the current OASDI income to find the
                cumulative OASDI COLAs since SSI and/or OAP was lost. This is the Pickle Disregard
                amount;

        e.      subtract the Pickle Disregard amount from the current OASDI income to get the
                countable OASDI income.

2.      If the countable OASDI income and all other countable income is less than the current SSI or
        OAP standard, and the individual meets all other eligibility criteria then medical eligibility must
        continue or be reinstated.

3.      This disregard must also be applied to any OASDI cost of living increases paid to any financially
        responsible individual such as a parent or spouse whose income is considered in determining the
        person's continued eligibility for Medical Assistance.

4.      The cost of living increase disregard specified in the preceding action must continue to be applied
        at each eligibility redetermination.

5.      An SSI medical only individual who loses SSI due to an OASDI cost-of-living increase shall be
        contacted by the eligibility site to determine if the individual would continue to remain eligible for
        Medical Assistance under the provisions for SSI related cases. The individual must complete an
        application for assistance to continue receiving benefits.

8.100.6.F.      1972 Disregard Individuals

1.      Medical Assistance must be provided to a person who was receiving financial assistance under
        AND or Aid to the Blind (AB) for August 1972 and who - except for the October 1972 Social
        Security (includes RRB) 20% increase amount would currently be eligible for financial assistance.
        This disregard must also be applied to a person receiving Medical Assistance in August 1972
        who was eligible for financial assistance but was not receiving the money payment and to a
        person receiving Medical Assistance as a resident in a medical institution in August 1972.

2.      To redetermine the eligibility of Medical Assistance recipients to whom the 1972 disregard
        applies, the eligibility site must:

        a.      review the case against the current applicable program definitions and requirements;

        b.      apply the resource and income criteria specified in section 8.100.5;

        c.      subtract the 1972 disregard amount from the income;

        d.      consider the remainder against the current appropriate SSI benefit level.




                                                                                                              88
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                           10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


8.100.6.G.      Individuals Eligible in 1973

1.      Medical Assistance must be provided to ABD persons who are receiving mandatory state
        supplementary payments (SSP). Such persons are those with income below their December
        1973 minimum income level (MIL).

2.      Medical Assistance must be provided to a person who was eligible for Medical Assistance in
        December 1973 as an inpatient of a medical facility, who continues to meet the December 1973
        eligibility criteria for institutionalized persons and who remains institutionalized.

3.      Medical Assistance must be provided to a person who was eligible for Medical Assistance in
        December 1973 as an “essential spouse” of an AND or AB financial assistance recipient, and
        who continues to be in the grant and continues to meet the December 1973 eligibility criteria.
        Except for such persons who were grandfathered-in for continued assistance, essential spouses
        included in assistance grants after December 1973 are not eligible for Medical Assistance.

8.100.6.H.      Eligibility for Certain Disabled Widow(er)s

1.      Medical Assistance shall be provided retroactive to July 1, 1986, to qualified disabled widow(er)s
        who lost SSI and/or state supplementation due to the 1983 change in the actuarial reduction
        formula prescribed in section 134 of P.L. No. 98 21.

        In order for these widow(er)s to qualify, these individuals must:

        a.      have been continuously entitled to Title II benefits since December 1983;

        b.      have been disabled widow(er)s in January 1984;

        c.      have established entitlement to Title II benefits prior to age 60;

        d.      have been eligible for SSI/SSP benefits prior to application of the revised actuarial
                reduction formula;

        e.      have subsequently lost eligibility for SSI/SSP as a result of the change in the actuarial
                table; and

        f.      reapply for assistance prior to July 1, 1987.

8.100.6.I.      Eligibility for Disabled Widow(er)s

1.      Effective January 1, 1991, Medical Assistance shall be provided to disabled widow(er)s age 50
        through 64 who lost SSI and/or OAP due to the receipt of Social Security benefits as a disabled
        widow(er). The individual shall remain eligible for Medical Assistance until he/she becomes
        eligible for Part A of Medicare (hospital insurance).

        To qualify these individuals must:

        a.      be a widow(er);

        b.      have received SSI in the past;

        c.      be at least 50 years old but not 65 years old;

        d.      no longer receive SSI payments because of Social Security payments;




                                                                                                            89
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                          10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


        e.      not have hospital insurance under Medicare; and,

        f.      meet all other Medical Assistance requirements.

8.100.6.J.      Disabled Adult Children

1.      Medical Assistance shall be provided to an individual aged 18 or older who loses SSI due to the
        receipt of OASDI drawn from his/her parents' Social Security Number; and:

        a.      who was determined disabled prior to the age of 22; and

        b.      who is currently receiving OASDI income as a Disabled Adult Child; and

        c.      who would continue to be eligible for SSI if:

                i)      the current OASDI income of the applicant is disregarded; and

                ii)     the resources are below the applicable limit as listed at 8.100.5.M; and

                iii)    other countable income is below the current years SSI FBR.

2.      Disabled Adult Children are identified by the OASDI Beneficiary Identification Code (BIC) of “C”.

8.100.6.K.      Old Age Pension (OAP) Eligibles

1.      Individuals that are 65 and over are defined as the OAP-A category. Individuals who attain the
        age of 60 but not yet 65 are defined as the OAP-B category.

2.      Medical Assistance must be provided to persons receiving OAP-A or OAP-B and SSI (SISC B).

3.      Medical Assistance must be provided to all OAP-A and OAP-B persons who also meet SSI
        eligibility criteria but are not receiving a money payment (SISC-B).

4.      Medical Assistance must be provided to all OAP-A and OAP-B persons who also meet SSI
        eligibility criteria except for the level of their income (SISC-B).

5.      Medical Assistance must be provided to persons in a facility eligible for Medical Assistance
        reimbursement whose income is under 300% of the SSI benefit level and who, but for the level of
        their income, would be eligible for OAP “A” or OAP “B” and SSI financial assistance. This group
        includes persons 65 years of age or older receiving active treatment as inpatients in a psychiatric
        facility eligible for Medical Assistance reimbursement (SISC A). This population is referenced as
        Psych >65.

6.      The OAP B individual included in AFDC assistance unit shall receive Medical Assistance as a
        member of the AFDC household (SISC B).

7.      The OAP State Only Medical Assistance Program provides Medical Assistance to OAP-A, OAP-B
        or OAP Refugees who lost their OAP financial assistance because of a cost of living adjustment
        other than OASDI. Examples of other sources of income are VA, RRB, PERA, etc. (SISC C).

8.      For the purpose of identifying the proper SISC code for persons receiving assistance under OAP
        “A” or OAP “B”, if the person:

        a.      receives an SSI payment (SISC B);




                                                                                                         90
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                           10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


        b.      does not receive an SSI payment but is receiving assistance under OAP “A”, a second
                evaluation of resources must be made using the same resource criteria as specified in
                section 8.100.5.M for those who meet this criteria the SISC code is B for money payment
                and “disregard” case, A for institutional cases;

        c.      does not receive an SSI payment and does not otherwise qualify under SISC code B or A
                as described in item b. above (SISC C).

8.100.6.L.      Qualified Medicare Beneficiaries (QMB)

1.      Medical Assistance coverage for QMB members is payment of Medicare part B premiums, co-
        insurance and deductibles.

2.      In order to be eligible as a Qualified Medicare Beneficiary, the individual must meet the following:

        a.      is entitled to Part A Medicare; and

        b.      resources may not exceed the standard for an individual or couple who have resources,
                as described in section 8.100.5.M; and

        c.      has income at or below the percentage of the federal poverty level for the size family as
                mandated for QMB by federal regulations. Poverty level is established by the Executive
                Office of Management and Budget.

        d.      is enrolled in the mandatory SSI program with premium-free Medicare Part A.

3.      For QMB purposes, couples shall have their income compared against the federal poverty level
        couples income maximum. This procedure shall be applied whether one or both members apply
        for QMB.

4.      For QMB purposes, income of the applicant and/or the spouse shall be determined as described
        under Income Requirements in section 8.100.5. If two or more individuals have earned income,
        the income of all the individuals shall be added together and the $65 plus one half remainder
        earned income disregard shall be applied to the total amount of earned income.

5.      Medicare cost sharing expenses must be provided to qualified Medicare beneficiaries. This
        limited Medical Assistance package of Medicare cost sharing expenses only includes:

        a.      payment of Part A Medicare premiums where applicable;

        b.      payment of Part B Medicare premiums; and

        c.      payment of coinsurance and deductibles for Medicare services whether or not a benefit of
                Medical Assistance up to the full Medicare rate or reasonable rates as established in the
                State Plan.

6.      Individuals may be QMB recipients only or the individual may be classified as a dual eligible. A
        dual eligible is a Medicare recipient who is otherwise eligible for Medical Assistance.

7.      A QMB-only recipient is an individual who is not eligible for other categorical assistance program
        due to their income and/or resources but who meets the eligibility criteria for QMB described
        above.

8.      Individuals who apply for QMB assistance have the right to have their eligibility determined under
        all categories of assistance for which they may qualify.




                                                                                                           91
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                            10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


9.     All other general non-financial requirements or conditions of eligibility must also be met such as
       age, citizenship, residency requirements as well as reporting and redetermination requirements.
       These criteria are defined in section 8.100.3 of this volume.

10.    Eligibility for QMB benefits shall be effective the month following the month of determination.
       Beneficiaries who submit and complete an application within the 45-day standard shall be eligible
       for benefits no later than the first of the month following the 45th day of application. Administrative
       delays shall not postpone the effective date of eligibility.

11.    QMB benefits are not retroactive and the three month retroactive Medical Assistance rule does
       not apply to QMB benefits.

12.    Members who would lose their QMB entitlement due to annual social security COLA will remain
       eligible for QMB coverage under Medical Assistance, as income disregard cases, until the next
       year's federal poverty guidelines are published.

8.100.6.M.     Specified Low Income Medicare Beneficiaries

1.     Medical Assistance coverage for SLMB clients is limited to payment of monthly Medicare Part B
       (Supplemental Medical Insurance Benefits) premiums.

2.     Effective January 1, 1993, a Specified Low Income Medicare Beneficiary (SLMB) is an individual
       who:

       a.      is entitled to Medicare Part A;

       b.      resources may not exceed the standard for an individual or couple who has resources as
               described in section 8.100.5.M of this volume.

       c.      has income at or below a percentage of the federal poverty level for the family size as
               mandated by federal regulations for SLMB. Income limits have been defined through CY
               1995, as follows: CY 1993 and 1994 100-110% of FPL, CY 1995 100-120% of FPL.

3.     For SLMB purposes, couples shall have their income compared against the federal poverty level
       couples income maximum. This procedure shall be applied whether one or both members apply
       for SLMB.

4.     For SLMB purposes, income of the applicant and/or the spouse shall be determined as described
       under Income Requirements in section 8.100.5. If two or more individuals have earned income,
       the income of all the individuals shall be added together and the $65 plus one half remainder
       earned income disregard shall be applied to the total amount of earned income.

5.     SLMB eligibility starts on the date of application or up to three month prior to the application date
       for retroactive Medical Assistance.

6.     Eligibility may be made retroactive up to 90 days, but may not be effective prior to 1/1/93.

7.     Clients who would lose their SLMB entitlement due to annual SSA COLA will remain eligible for
       SLMB coverage, as income disregard cases, through the month following the month in which the
       annual federal poverty levels (FPL) update is published.

8.100.6.N.     Medicare Qualifying Individuals 1 (QI1)

1.     Medical Assistance coverage is limited to monthly payment of Medicare Part B premiums.
       Payment of the premium shall be made by the Department on behalf of the individual.




                                                                                                           92
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                             10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


2.     Eligibility for this benefit is limited by the availability of the allocation set by CMS. Once the state
       allocation is met, no further benefits under this category shall be paid and a waiting list of eligible
       individuals shall be maintained.

3.     Eligibility for QI1 benefits shall be effective the month in which application is made and the
       individual is eligible for benefits. Eligibility may be retroactive up to three months from the date of
       application, but not prior to January 1, 1998.

4.     In order to qualify as a Medicare Qualifying Individual 1, the individual must meet the following:

       a.      be entitled to Part A of Medicare,

       b.      income of at least 120%, but less than 135% of the FPL.

       c.      resources may not exceed the standard as described in section 8.100.5.M, and

       d.      he/she cannot otherwise be eligible for Medical Assistance.

5.     For QI1 purposes, income of the applicant and/or the spouse shall be determined as described
       under Income Requirements in section 8.100.5. If two or more individuals have earned income,
       the income of all the individuals shall be added together and the $65 plus one half remainder
       earned income disregard shall be applied to the total amount of earned income.

6.     Clients who would lose QI-1 entitlement due to annual social security COLA will remain eligible
       for QI-1 coverage under Medical Assistance, as an income disregard case, until the next year’s
       federal poverty guidelines are published.

8.100.6.O.     Qualified Disabled And Working Individuals

1.     Medical Assistance coverage is limited to monthly payment of Medicare Part A premiums, and
       any other Medicare cost sharing expenses determined necessary by CMS.

2.     Effective July 1, 1990, a Qualified Disabled and Working Individual (QDWI) is an individual who:

       a.      was a recipient of federal Social Security Disability Insurance (SSDI) benefits, who
               continues to be disabled but lost SSDI entitlement due to earned income in excess of the
               Social Security Administration's Substantial Gainful Activity (SGA) threshold, and;

       b.      has exhausted SSA's allowed extension of “premium free” Medicare Part A coverage
               under SSDI, and;

       c.      has resources at or below twice the SSI resource limit as described in section 8.100.5.,
               and;

       d.      has income less than 200% of FPL.

3.     For QDWI purposes, income of the applicant and/or the spouse shall be determined as described
       under Income Requirements in section 8.100.5. If two or more individuals have earned income,
       the income of all the individuals shall be added together and the $65 plus one half remainder
       earned income disregard shall be applied to the total amount of earned income.

4.     An individual may be eligible under this section only if he/she is not otherwise eligible under
       another Medical Assistance category of eligibility.

5.     Eligibility for QDWI benefits shall be effective the month of determination of entitlement.




                                                                                                             93
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                         10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


6.     Eligibility may be retroactive only to the date as of which SSA approves an individual's application
       for coverage as a “Qualified Disabled and Working Individual”. However, eligibility may not begin
       prior to 07/01/90.

8.100.6.P.     Medicaid Buy-In Program for Working Adults with Disabilities.

1.     To be eligible for the Medicaid Buy-In Program for Working Adults with Disabilities:

       a.      Applicants must be at least age 16.

       b.      Income must be less than or equal to 450% of FPL after income allocations and
               disregards. See 8.100.5.F for Income Requirements and 8.100.5.H for Income allocations
               and disregards. Only the applicant’s income will be considered.

       c.      Resources are not counted in determining eligibility.

       d.      Individuals must have a disability as defined by Social Security Administration medical
               listing or a limited disability as determined by a state contractor.

       e.      Individuals must be employed. Please see Verification Requirements at 8.100.5.B.1.c.

               i)      Due to the federal COVID-19 Public Health Emergency, and required by the
                       Federal CARES Act for the Maintenance of Effort (MOE), members who had a
                       loss of employment will remain in the Buy-In program until the end of the federal
                       Public Health Emergency. At the end of the federal Public Health Emergency
                       effective May 11, 2023, members will be redetermined based on their current
                       employment status and be required to be employed to be eligible for the
                       program. New applicants enrolled will still need to meet the work requirement.

       f.      Individuals will be required to pay monthly premiums on a sliding scale based on income.

               i)      The amount of premiums cannot exceed 7.5% of the individual’s income.

               ii)     Premiums are charged beginning the month after determination of eligibility. Any
                       premiums for the months prior to the determination of eligibility will be waived.

               iii)    Premium amounts are as follows:

                       1)       There is no monthly premium for individuals with income at or below 40%
                                FPL.

                       2)       A monthly premium of $25 is applied to individuals with income above
                                40% of FPL but at or below 133% of FPL.

                       3)       A monthly premium of $90 is applied to individuals with income above
                                133% of FPL but at or below 200% of FPL.

                       4)       A monthly premium of $130 is applied to individuals with income above
                                200% of FPL but at or below 300% of FPL.

                       5)       A monthly premium of $200 is applied to individuals with income above
                                300% of FPL but at or below 450% of FPL.




                                                                                                         94
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                            10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


               iv)     The premium amounts will be updated at the beginning of each State fiscal year
                       based on the annually revised FPL if the revised FPL would cause the premium
                       amount (based on percentage of income) to increase by $10 or more.

               v)      A change in a member’s net income may impact the monthly premium amount
                       due. Failure to pay premium payments in full within 60 days from the premium
                       due date will result in the member’s assistance being terminated prospectively.
                       The effective date of the termination will be the last day of the month following
                       the 60 days from the date on which the premium became past due. The
                       Department will waive premiums for the Medicaid Buy-In for Working Adults with
                       Disability Program for member’s who are within their 12 months postpartum
                       period.

2.     Retroactive coverage is available according to 8.100.3.E, however is not available prior to
       program implementation

3.     Individuals have the option to request to be disenrolled if they have been enrolled into the
       Medicaid Buy-In Program for Working Adults with Disabilities. This is also called “opt out.”

8.100.6.Q.     Medicaid Buy-In Program for Children with Disabilities

1.     To be eligible for the Medicaid Buy-In Program for Children with Disabilities:

       a.      Applicants must be age 18 or younger.

       b.      Household income will be considered and must be less than or equal to 300% of FPL
               after income disregards. The following rules apply:

               i)      8.100.4.E - MAGI Household Requirements

               ii)     8.100.5.F - Income Requirements

               iii)    8.100.5.F.6 - Income Exemptions

               iv)     8.100.5.H. Income Allocations and Disregards

       c.      Resources are not counted in determining eligibility.

       d.      Individuals must have a disability as defined by Social Security Administration medical
               listing.

       e.      Children age 16 through 18 cannot be employed. If employed, children age 16 through 18
               will be determined for eligibility through the Medicaid Buy-In Program for Working Adults
               with Disabilities.

       f.      Families are required to enroll in medical family coverage offered through an employer-
               based group health plan if they are eligible and if the employer contributes at least 50%
               towards the plan premiums.

       g.      Families will be required to pay monthly premiums on a sliding scale based on household
               size and income.




                                                                                                           95
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                         10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


              i)      For families whose income does not exceed 200% of FPL, the amount of
                      premiums and cost-sharing charges cannot exceed 5% of the family’s adjusted
                      gross income. For families whose income exceeds 200% of FPL but does not
                      exceed 300% of FPL, the amount of premiums and cost-sharing charges cannot
                      exceed 7.5% of the family’s adjusted gross income.

              ii)     Premiums are charged beginning the month after determination of eligibility. Any
                      premiums for the months prior to the determination of eligibility will be waived.

              iii)    For households with two or more children eligible for the Medicaid Buy-In
                      Program for Children with Disabilities, the total premium shall be the amount due
                      for one eligible child.

              iv)     Premium amounts are as follows:

                      1)       There is no monthly premium for households with income at or below
                               133% of FPL.

                      2)       A monthly premium of $70 is applied to households with income above
                               133% of FPL but at or below 185% of FPL.

                      3)       A monthly premium of $90 is applied to individuals with income above
                               185% of FPL but at or below 250% of FPL.

                      4)       A monthly premium of $120 is applied to individuals with income above
                               250% of FPL but at or below 300% of FPL.

              v)      The premium amounts will be updated at the beginning of each State fiscal year
                      based on the annually revised FPL if the revised FPL would cause the premium
                      amount (based on percentage of income) to increase by $10 or more.

              vi)     A change in household net income may impact the monthly premium amount
                      due. Failure to pay premium payments in full within 60 days from the premium
                      due date will result in a member’s assistance being terminated prospectively. The
                      effective date of the termination will be the last day of the month following the 60
                      days from the date on which the premium became past due. The Department will
                      waive premiums for the Children with Disabilities Program members who are
                      within their 12 months postpartum period.

              vii)    Due to the federal COVID-19 Public Health Emergency, the Department will
                      waive premiums for the Department’s Children with Disabilities Program during
                      the federal emergency declaration. Effective May 11, 2023 the COVID -19 Public
                      Health Emergency has ended. The Department will continue to waive premiums
                      until the last day of the twelfth month following the end of the COVID - 19 Public
                      Health Emergency. The Department will notify all members as to when required
                      premiums will resume.

2.    Retroactive coverage is available according to 8.100.3.E, however is not available prior to
      program implementation.

3.    Verification requirements will follow the MAGI Category Verification Requirements found at
      8.100.4.B.

4,    Individuals have the option to request to be disenrolled if they have been enrolled into the
      Medicaid Buy-In Program for Children with Disabilities. This is also called “opt out.”




                                                                                                       96
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                               10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


8.100.7           Long-Term Care Medical Assistance Eligibility

8.100.7.A.        Persons in Long-Term Care Institutions or Other Residential Placement

1.        For Long-Term Care services to be covered in a Long-Term Care institution, a client must be
          determined eligible under the 300% Institutionalized Special Income category. If the client is
          already Medicaid eligible, a new application is not required but the client must be determined to
          meet the eligibility criteria.

          For a client entering a Long-Term Care Institution from the community, the Eligibility Site must
          notify the Single Entry Point/Case Management Agency, upon receipt of the application or client
          request, to schedule the Long-Term Services and Supports Level of Care Eligibility Determination
          Screen. This is not applicable to a client being discharged from a hospital, nursing facility or
          Long-Term Home Health.

          For purposes of applying the special income standard for the aged, disabled or blind persons in
          Long-Term Care Institutions, gross income means income before application of deductions,
          exemptions or disregards appropriate to the SSI program.

          Medical Assistance will be provided beginning the first day of the month following the month
          during which a child under the age of 18 ceases to live with his or her parent(s). Once determined
          to meet the institutional requirement, parental income and resources will cease to be deemed
          available to the child because the child is institutionalized and not living in the parents' home.

2.        Eligibility under the 300% Institutionalized Special Income category will be provided to applicants
          who:

          a.      Have attained the age of 65 years or;

          b.      Have met the requirements according to the definition of disability or blindness applicable
                  to the Social Security Disability Insurance (SSDI) and Supplemental Security Income
                  (SSI)

          c.      Have been institutionalized for at least 30 consecutive full days in a Long-Term Care
                  institution. The 30 consecutive full day stay may be a combination of days in a hospital,
                  Long-Term Care institution, or receiving services from a Home and Community Based
                  Services (HCBS) program or Program of All Inclusive Care for the Elderly (PACE).

                  Supporting documentation must be provided which verifies the 30 consecutive full days.
                  This documentation shall include the Long-Term Services and Supports Level of Care
                  Eligibility Determination and/or medical records which must be verified by a physician or
                  case manager.

                  If a client dies prior to the 30th consecutive full day, the client shall be determined to have
                  met the 30 consecutive full day requirement if:

                  i)      There is a statement from a physician, or case manager that declares if the client
                          had not died, he/she would have been institutionalized for 30 consecutive full
                          days, and;

                  ii)     The statement is verified by supporting documentation from the beginning of the
                          institutionalized period, which is the first 15 days, or prior to the death of the
                          client, whichever is earliest.




                                                                                                              97
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                         10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


              iii)    Once the 30 consecutive days of institutionalization requirement has been met,
                      Medical Assistance benefits start as of the first day when institutionalization
                      began if all other eligibility requirements were met as of that date.

      d.      Are in a facility eligible for Medical Assistance Program reimbursement if the individual is
              in a hospital or Long-Term Care institution; and

      e.      Have gross income that does not exceed 300% of the current individual SSI benefit level
              or;

              Are in a Long-Term Care institution (excluding hospital) whose gross income exceeds the
              300% level and who establishes an income trust in accordance with the rules on income
              trusts in section 8.100.7 of this volume;

              i)      This special income standard must be applied for:

                      1)      A person 65 years of age or older, or disabled or blind receiving care in a
                              hospital, nursing facility; or

                      2)      A person who is not SSI eligible needing Long-Term Care from HCBS or
                              PACE; or

                      3)      A person 65 years of age or older receiving active treatment as an
                              inpatient in a psychiatric facility eligible for Medical Assistance
                              reimbursement; and

      f.      Have resources that conform with the regulations regarding resource limits and
              exemptions set forth in section 8.100.5 of this volume; and

      g.      If married, Income and resources conform to rules set forth at 8.100.7.C and 8.100.7.K;
              and

      h.      Have not transferred assets without fair consideration on or after the look-back date
              defined in section 8.100.7.F.2.d. which would incur a penalty period of ineligibility in
              accordance with the regulations on transfers without fair consideration in section 8.100.7
              of this volume; and

      i.      Have submitted trust documents to the Department if the individual or the individual's
              spouse has transferred assets into a trust or is a beneficiary of trust. The Department
              shall determine the effect of the trust on Medical Assistance Program eligibility.

      j.      Have submitted documents verifying that an annuity conforms to the regulations
              regarding Annuities at 8.100.7.I.

3.    An appeal process is available to children identified by C.R.S. 27-10.3-101 to 108, The Child
      Mental Health Treatment Act, who are denied residential treatment. The appeal process is
      outlined in the Income Maintenance Staff Manual of the Department of Human Services (9 CCR
      2503-1). A determination made in connection with this appeal shall not be the final agency action
      with regard to Medical Assistance eligibility




                                                                                                        98
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                            10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


8.100.7.B.     Persons Requesting Long-term Care through Home and Community Based
        Services (HCBS) or the Program of All Inclusive Care for the Elderly (PACE)

1.     HCBS or PACE shall be provided to persons who have been assessed by the Single Entry
       Point/Case Management Agency to have met the institutional level of care and will remain in the
       community by receiving HCBS or PACE; and

       a.      are SSI (including 1619b) or OAP Medicaid eligible; or

       b.      are eligible under the Institutionalized 300% Special Income category described at
               8.100.7.A; or

       c.      are eligible under the Medicaid Buy-In Program for Working Adults with Disabilities
               described at 8.100.6.P. For this group, access to HCBS:

               i)       Is limited to the Elderly, Blind and Disabled (EBD), Community Mental Health
                        Supports (CMHS), Brain Injury (BI), Spinal Cord Injury (SCI), Supported Living
                        Services (SLS), and Developmental Disabilities waivers; and

               ii)      Is contingent on the Department receiving all necessary federal approval for the
                        waiver amendments that extend access to HCBS to the Working Adults with
                        Disabilities population described at 8.100.6.P.

2.     A client who is already Medicaid eligible does not need to submit a new application. The client
       must request the need for Long-Term Care services and the Eligibility Site must redetermine the
       client’s eligibility.

       a.      All individuals applying for or requesting Long-Term Care services must disclose and
               provide documentation of:

               i)       any transfer of assets without fair consideration as described at 8.100.7.F; and

               ii)      any interest in an annuity as described at 8.100.7.I; and

               iii)     any interest in a trust as described at 8.100.7.E.

       b.      Failure to disclose and provide documentation of the assets described at 8.100.7.B.2.a
               may result in the denial of Long-Term Care services.

       c.      The requirements at 8.100.7.B.2.a and 8.100.7.B.2.b do not apply to individuals who
               have been determined eligible under the Medicaid Buy-In Program for Working Adults
               with Disabilities described at 8.100.6.P.

3.     For individuals served in Alternative Care Facilities (ACF), income in excess of the personal
       needs allowance and room and board amount for the ACF shall be applied to the Medical
       Assistance charges for ACF services. The total amount allowed for personal need and room and
       board cannot exceed the State's Old Age Pension Standard.

8.100.7.C.     Treatment of Income and Resources for Married Couples

1.     The income of a community spouse is not deemed to the institutionalized spouse in determining
       eligibility. If both spouses are institutionalized, their individual income is counted in determining
       their own eligibility. The income of one institutionalized spouse is not deemed to the other
       institutionalized spouse when determining eligibility.




                                                                                                           99
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                          10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


2.     The income and resources of both spouses are counted in determining eligibility for either or both
       spouses with the following exceptions:

       a.      If spouses share the same room in an institution, the income of the individual spouse is
               counted in determining his or her eligibility, and each spouse is allowed the $2000 limit
               for resources.

       b.      Beginning the first month following the month the couple ceases to live together, only the
               income of the individual spouse is counted in determining his or her eligibility.

       c.      If one spouse is applying for Long-Term Care in a Long-Term Care institution or Home
               and Community Based Services (HCBS), refer to the rules on Treatment of Income and
               Resources for Institutionalized Spouses.

3.     Long term care insurance benefits are not countable as income, but are payable as part of the
       patient payment to the Long-Term Care institution.

4.     For living expense purposes, income and resources of spouses living in the same household for a
       full calendar month or more must be considered as available to each other, whether or not they
       are actually contributed, and must be evaluated in accordance with rules contained in 8.100.7.Q.

Long-Term Care

8.100.7.D.     Other Medical Assistance Clients Requesting Long-Term Care in an Institution or
        through HCBS or PACE

Clients who need Long-Term Care services who are eligible for the State Only Health Care Program shall
submit an application because they are not already Medicaid eligible.

8.100.7.E      Consideration of Trusts in Determining Medical Assistance Eligibility

1.     Trusts established before August 11, 1993:

       a.      Medical Assistance Qualifying Trust (MQT)

               i)      In the case of a Medical Assistance qualifying trust, as defined in 42 U.S.C. Sec.
                       1396a(k), the amount of the trust property that is considered available to the
                       applicant/recipient who established the trust (or whose spouse established the
                       trust) is the maximum amount that the trustee(s) is permitted under the trust to
                       distribute to the individual assuming the full exercise of discretion by the
                       trustee(s) for the distribution of the maximum amount to the applicant/recipient.
                       This amount of property is deemed available resources to the individual, whether
                       or not is actually received.

               ii)     42 U.S.C. Sec. 1396a(k) was repealed in 1993 and is reprinted here exclusively
                       for purposes of trusts established before August 11, 1993. 42 U.S.C. Sec.
                       1396a(k) defines a Medical Assistance qualifying trust as “a trust, or similar legal
                       device, established (other than by will) by an individual (or an individual's spouse)
                       under which the individual may be the beneficiary of all or part of the payments
                       from the trust and the distribution of such payments is determined by one or
                       more trustees who are permitted to exercise any discretion with respect to the
                       distribution to the individual.”




                                                                                                        100
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                           10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


      b.      This provision does not apply to any trust or initial decrees established before April 7,
              1986, solely for the benefit of a developmentally disabled individual who resides in an
              Long Term Care Institution for the developmentally disabled.

      c.      This provision does not apply to individuals who are receiving SSI.

2.    Trusts established on or after July 1, 1994:

      Assets include all income and resources of the individual and the individual's spouse, including all
      income and resources which the individual or the individual's spouse is entitled to but does not
      receive because of action by any of the following:

      a.      The individual or the individual's spouse,

      b.      A person, including a court or administrative body, with legal authority to act in place of or
              on behalf of the individual or the individual’s spouse, or

      c.      Any person court or administrative body acting at the direction of or upon the request of
              the individual or the individual's spouse.

3.    In determining an individual's eligibility for Medical Assistance, the following regulations apply to a
      trust established by an individual:

      a.      An individual shall be considered to have established a trust if assets of the individual
              were used to form all or part of the corpus of the trust, and if any of the following
              individuals established the trust, other than by will:

              i)       The individual or the individual's spouse

              ii)      A person, including a court or administrative body, with legal authority to act in
                       place of, or on the behalf of, the individual or the individual's spouse;

              iii)     A person, including a court or administrative body acting at the direction or upon
                       the request of the individual or the individual's spouse.

      b.      In the case of a trust, the corpus of which includes assets of an individual and the assets
              of any other person(s), this regulation shall apply to the portion of the trust attributable to
              the assets of the individual.

      c.      These regulations apply without regard to the following:

              i)       The purposes for which a trust is established;

              ii)      Whether the trustees have or exercise any discretion under the trust;

              iii)     Any restrictions on when or whether distributions may be made from the trust; or

              iv)      Any restrictions on the use of distributions from the trust.

4.    Revocable Trusts are considered as follows:

      a.      The corpus of the trust shall be considered resources available to the individual.

      b.      Payments from the trust to or for the benefit of the individual shall be considered income
              to the individual, and




                                                                                                          101
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                            10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


      c.      Any other payments from the trust shall be considered assets transferred by the
              individual for less than fair market value and are subject to a 60 month look back period
              and a penalty period of ineligibility as set forth in the regulations on transfers without fair
              consideration in this volume.

5.    Irrevocable Trusts

      If there are any circumstances under which payments from the trust could be made to or for the
      benefit of the individual, the following shall apply:

      a)      The portion of the corpus of the trust, or the income on the corpus, from which payment
              to the individual could be made, shall be considered as resources available to the
              individual.

      b)      Payments from that portion of the corpus, or income to or for the benefit of the individual,
              shall be considered income to the individual.

      c)      Payments from that portion of the corpus or income for any other purpose shall be
              considered as a transfer of assets by the individual for less than fair market value and are
              subject to a 60 month look back period and a penalty period of ineligibility as set forth in
              the regulations on transfers without fair consideration in this volume.

      d)      Any portion of the trust from which, or any income on the corpus from which no payment
              could be made to the individual under any circumstances, shall be considered as a
              transfer of assets for less than fair market value and shall be subject to a 60 month look
              back period and penalty period of ineligibility as set forth in the regulations on transfers
              without fair consideration in this volume. The transfer will be effective as of the date of the
              establishment of the trust, or the date on which payment to the individual from the trust
              was foreclosed, if later. The value of the trust shall be determined by including the
              amount of any payments made from such portion of the trust after such date.

6.    The preceding regulations for trusts established on or after July 1, 1994, do not apply to the
      following:

      a.      Income Trusts

              i)      A trust consisting only of the individual's pension income, social security income
                      and other monthly income that is established for the purpose of establishing
                      income eligibility for Long Term Care institution care or Home and Community
                      Based Services (HCBS). To be valid, the trust must meet the following criteria:

                      a)       The individual's gross monthly income must be above the 300%-SSI limit
                               but below the average cost of private Long Term Care institution care in
                               the geographic region in which the individual resides and intends to
                               remain. The Colorado Department of Health Care Policy and Financing
                               shall calculate the average rates for such regions on an annual,
                               calendar-year basis. The geographic regions which are used for
                               calculating the average private pay rate for Long Term Care institution
                               care shall be based on the Bureau of Economic Analysis Regions and
                               consist of the following counties:

                               REGION I: (Adams, Arapahoe, Boulder, Broomfield, Denver, Jefferson)




                                                                                                           102
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                  10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


                        REGION II: (Cheyenne, Clear Creek, Douglas, Elbert, Gilpin, Grand,
                              Jackson, Kit Carson, Larimer, Logan, Morgan, Park, Phillips,
                              Sedgwick, Summit, Washington, Weld, Yuma)

                        REGION III: (Alamosa, Baca, Bent, Chaffee, Conejos, Costilla, Crowley,
                              Custer, El Paso, Fremont, Huerfano, Kiowa, Lake, Las Animas,
                              Lincoln, Mineral, Otero, Prowers, Pueblo, Rio Grande,
                              Saguache, Teller)

                        REGION IV: (Archuleta, Delta, Dolores, Eagle, Garfield, Gunnison,
                              Hinsdale, La Plata, Mesa, Moffat, Montezuma, Montrose, Ouray,
                              Pitkin, Rio Blanco, Routt, San Juan, San Miguel)

                  b)    For Long Term Care institution clients, each month the trustee shall
                        distribute the entire amount of income which is transferred into the trust.
                        An amount not to exceed $20.00 may be retained for trust expenses
                        such as bank charges if such charges are expected to be incurred by the
                        trust.

                  c)    The only deductions from the monthly trust distribution to the Long Term
                        Care institution are the allowable deductions which are permitted for
                        Medical Assistance-eligible persons who do not have income trusts.
                        Allowable deductions include only the following:

                        i)      Personal need allowance

                        ii)     Spousal income payments

                        iii)    Approved PETI payments

                  d)    Any funds remaining after the allowable deductions shall be paid solely
                        to the cost of the Long Term Care institution care in an amount not to
                        exceed the Medical Assistance reimbursement rate. Any excess income
                        which is not distributed shall accumulate in the trust.

                  e)    No other deductions or expenses may be paid from the trust. Expenses
                        which cannot be paid from the trust include, but are not limited to, trustee
                        fees, attorney fees and costs (including attorney fees and costs incurred
                        in establishing the trust), accountant fees, court fees and costs, fees for
                        guardians ad litem, funeral expenses, past-due medical bills and other
                        debts. Trustee fees which were ordered prior to April 1, 1996 may
                        continue until the trust terminates.

                  f)    For HCBS clients, the amount distributed each month shall be limited to
                        the 300% of the SSI limit. Any monthly income above that amount shall
                        remain in the trust. An amount not to exceed $20.00 may be retained for
                        trust expenses such as bank charges if such charges are expected to be
                        incurred by the trust. No other trust expenses or deductions may be paid
                        from the trust. For the purpose of calculating Individual Cost
                        Containment or client payment (PETI), the client's monthly income will be
                        300% of the SSI limit. Upon termination, the funds which have
                        accumulated in the trust shall be paid to the Department up to the total
                        amount of Medical Assistance paid on behalf of the individual.




                                                                                                103
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                            10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


                    g)          For a court-approved trust, notice of the time and place of the hearing,
                                with the petition and trust attached, shall be given to the eligibility site
                                and the Department in the manner prescribed by law.

                    h)          The sole beneficiaries of the trust are the individual for whose benefit the
                                trust is established and the Department. The trust terminates upon the
                                death of the individual or if the trust is not required for Medical
                                Assistance eligibility in Colorado.

                    i)          The trust must provide that upon the death of the individual or
                                termination of the trust, whichever occurs sooner, the Department shall
                                receive all amounts remaining in the trust up to the total amount of
                                Medical Assistance paid on behalf of the individual.

                    j)          The trust must include the name and mailing address of the trustee. The
                                trustee must notify the Department of any trustee address changes or
                                change of trustee(s) within 30 calendar days.

                    k)          The trust must provide that an annual accounting of trust income and
                                expenditures and an annual statement of trust assets shall be submitted
                                to the eligibility site or to the Department upon reasonable request or
                                upon any change of trustee.

                    l)          The amount remaining in the trust and an accounting of the trust shall be
                                due to the Department within three months after the death of the
                                individual or termination of the trust, whichever is sooner. An extension
                                of time may be granted by the Department if a written request is
                                submitted within two months of the termination of the trust.

                    m)          The regulations in this section for income trusts shall also apply to
                                income trusts established after January 1, 1992, under the undue
                                hardship provisions in 26-4-506.3(3),C.R.S. and 15-14-412.5,C.R.S.

      b.    Disability Trusts

            i)      A trust that is established solely for the benefit of a disabled individual under the
                    age of 65, which consists of the assets of the individual, and is established for
                    the purpose or with the effect of establishing or maintaining the individual's
                    resource eligibility for Medical Assistance and which meets the following criteria:

                    a)          The individual for whom the trust is established must meet the disability
                                criteria of Social Security.

                    b)          [Removed and Reserved]

                    c)          The trust is established solely for the benefit of the disabled individual by
                                the individual, the individual’s parent, the individual’s grandparent, the
                                individual’s legal guardian, or by the court.

                    d)          The sole lifetime beneficiaries of the trust are the individual for whose
                                benefit the trust is established, the Colorado Department of Health Care
                                Policy and Financing, and any other state that provides medical
                                assistance to the individual under such state’s Medicaid program.




                                                                                                           104
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                   10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


                  e)    The trust terminates upon the death of the individual or if the trust is no
                        longer required for Medical Assistance eligibility.

                        i)      If the individual becomes ineligible for Medical Assistance in
                                Colorado or any other state due to a change in residency, then
                                the trust shall terminate unless the Department receives proof
                                that: (1) the individual is receiving medical assistance under
                                another state’s Medicaid program; and (2) the trust is required
                                for the individual to receive those medical assistance benefits.
                                The trustee must submit the required proof no later than sixty
                                (60) calendar days from the date the trustee acquires knowledge
                                of the change in residency. An extension of time may be granted
                                upon submission of a written request to the Department by the
                                trustee.

                        ii)     The trustee must provide the Department with notice of the
                                individual’s death, loss of Medicaid eligibility, or change in
                                residency no later than sixty (60) calendar days from the date the
                                trustee acquires knowledge of such event.

                  f)    Any statutory lien pursuant to section 25.5-4-301(5), C.R.S. must be
                        satisfied prior to funding of the trust and approval of the trust.

                  g)    If the trust is funded with an annuity or other periodic payments, the trust
                        shall be named on the contract or settlement as the remainder
                        beneficiary or the Department and any other state that provided medical
                        assistance to the individual under such state’s Medicaid program may be
                        named as remainder beneficiary up to the amount of Medical Assistance
                        paid on behalf of the individual.

                  h)    The trust shall provide that, upon the death of the beneficiary or
                        termination of the trust, the Department and any other state that provided
                        medical assistance to the individual under such state’s Medicaid program
                        shall receive all amounts remaining in the trust up to the amount of total
                        medical assistance paid on behalf of the individual. If the trust does not
                        have sufficient funds to reimburse each state in full, the amount
                        remaining in the trust shall be distributed based on each state's
                        proportionate share of the total amount of medical assistance benefits
                        paid by all of the states on the individual’s behalf.

                  i)    No expenditures may be made after the death of the beneficiary, except
                        for federal and state taxes. However, prior to the death of the individual
                        beneficiary, trust funds may be used to purchase a burial fund for the
                        beneficiary.

                  j)    The amount remaining in the trust and an accounting of the trust shall be
                        due to the Department within three months after the death of the
                        individual or termination of the trust, whichever is sooner. An extension
                        of time may be granted by the Department if a written request is
                        submitted within two months of the termination of the trust.

                  k)    The trust fund shall not be considered as a countable resource in
                        determining eligibility for Medical Assistance.




                                                                                                 105
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                        10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


                   l)       [Rule 8.110.52 B 5. b. 1) l), adopted or amended on or after November 1,
                            2000 and before November 1, 2001 was not extended by HB 02-1203,
                            and therefore expired May 15, 2002.]

                   m)       Distributions from the trust may be made only to or for the benefit of the
                            individual beneficiary. Cash distributions from the trust shall be
                            considered income to the individual. Distributions for food or shelter are
                            considered in-kind income and are countable toward income eligibility.

                   n)       If exempt resources are purchased with trust funds, those resources
                            continue to be exempt. If non-exempt resources are purchased, those
                            resources are countable toward eligibility.

                   o)       The trust must include the name and mailing address of the trustee. The
                            Department must be notified of any trustee address changes or change
                            of trustee(s) within 30 calendar days.

                   p)       The trust must provide that an accounting of trust income and
                            expenditures and statement of trust assets shall be submitted to the
                            eligibility site and to the Department on an annual basis and upon
                            reasonable request or any change of trustee. Further, the trust must
                            provide that the trustee is required to give the Department notice of any
                            distribution in excess of $5,000 no later than thirty (30) days after such
                            distribution. The Department shall acknowledge receipt within thirty (30)
                            days of receiving the notice.

                   q)       Prior to the establishment or funding of a disability trust, the trust shall be
                            submitted for review to the Department, along with proof that the
                            individual beneficiary is disabled according to Social Security criteria. No
                            disability trust shall be valid unless the Department has reviewed the
                            trust and determined that the trust conforms to the requirements of 15-
                            14-412.8,C.R.S., as amended, and any rules adopted by the Medical
                            Services Board..

      c.    Pooled Trusts

            i)     A trust consisting of individual accounts established for disabled individuals for
                   the purpose of establishing resource eligibility for Medical Assistance. A valid
                   pooled trust shall meet the following criteria:

                   a)       The individual for whom the trust is established must meet the disability
                            criteria of Social Security.

                   b)       The trust is established and managed by a non-profit association which
                            has been approved by the Internal Revenue Service.

                   c)       A separate account is maintained for each beneficiary; however, the trust
                            pools the accounts for the purposes of investment and management of
                            the funds.

                   d)       The sole lifetime beneficiaries of each trust account are the individual for
                            whom the trust is established and the Department.

                   e)       If the trust is funded with an annuity or other periodic payments, the
                            Department or the pooled trust shall be named as remainder beneficiary.




                                                                                                       106
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                        10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


                    f)      The trust account shall be established by the disabled individual, parent,
                            grandparent, legal guardian, or the court.

                    g)      The only assets used to fund each trust account are (1) the proceeds
                            from any personal injury case brought on behalf of the disabled
                            individual, or (2) retroactive payments of SSI benefits under Sullivan v.
                            Zeblev . (This provision is applicable to pooled trusts established from
                            July 1, 1994 to December 31, 2000.)

                    h)      Any statutory lien pursuant to section 25.5-4-301(5), C.R.S. must be
                            satisfied prior to funding of the individual's trust account and approval of
                            the joinder agreement.

                    i)      Following the disabled individual's death or termination of the trust
                            account, whichever occurs sooner, to the extent that the remaining funds
                            in the trust account are not retained by the pooled trust, the Department
                            shall receive any amount remaining in the individual's trust account up to
                            the total amount of Medical Assistance paid on behalf of the individual.

                    j)      The pooled trust account shall not be considered as a countable
                            resource in determining Medical Assistance eligibility.

                    k)      Distributions from the trust account may be made only to or for the
                            benefit of the individual. Cash distributions to the individual from the trust
                            shall be considered as income to the individual. Distributions for food or
                            shelter are considered in-kind income and are countable toward income
                            eligibility.

                    l)      If exempt resources are purchased with trust funds, those resources
                            continue to be exempt. If non-exempt resources are purchased, those
                            resources are countable toward resource eligibility.

            ii)     If an institutionalized individual for whom a pooled trust is established is 65 years
                    of age or older, the transfer of assets into the pooled trust creates a rebuttable
                    resumption that the assets were transferred without fair consideration and shall
                    be analyzed in accordance with the rules on transfers without fair consideration
                    in this volume. This regulation is effective for transfers to pooled trusts after
                    January 1, 2001.

            iii)    When the individual beneficiary of an income, disability or pooled trust dies or the
                    trust is terminated, the trustee shall promptly notify the eligibility site and the
                    Department. To the extent required by these rules the trustee shall promptly
                    forward the remainder of the trust property to the Department, up to the amount
                    of Medical Assistance paid on behalf of the individual beneficiary.

      d.    Third Party Trusts

            i)      Third party trusts are trusts which are established with assets which are
                    contributed by individuals other than the applicant or the applicant's spouse for
                    the benefit of an applicant or client

            ii)     The terms of the trust will determine whether the trust fund is countable as a
                    resource or income for Medical Assistance eligibility.




                                                                                                      107
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                                 10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


                iii)     Trusts which limit distributions to non-support or supplemental needs will not be
                         considered as a countable resource. If distributions are made for income or
                         resources, such distributions are countable as such for eligibility.

                iv)      If the trust requires income distributions, the amount of the income shall be
                         countable as income in determining eligibility.

                v)       If the trust requires principal distributions, that amount shall be considered as a
                         countable resource.

                vi)      If the trustee may exercise discretion in distributing income or resources, the
                         income or resources are not countable in determining eligibility. If distributions
                         are made for income or resources, such distributions are countable as such for
                         eligibility.

        e.      Federally Approved Trusts

                i)       If an SSI recipient has a trust which has been approved by the Social Security
                         Administration, eligibility for Medical Assistance cannot be delayed or denied.
                         Individuals on SSI are automatically eligible for Medical Assistance despite the
                         existence of a federally approved trust.

                ii)      If the eligibility site has a copy of a federally approved trust, the eligibility site
                         must send a copy to the Department.

7.      Submission of Trust Documents and Records

        a.      The trustee of a trust which was established by or which benefits a Medical Assistance
                Applicant or client shall submit trust documents and records to the eligibility site and to
                the Department.

        b.      This requirement includes documents and records for income trusts, disability trusts and
                the joinder agreement for each pooled trust account.

        c.      The eligibility site shall submit any trust which is submitted with an application or at
                redetermination to The Department. The eligibility site shall determine Medical
                Assistance eligibility based on the determination of The Department as to the effect of the
                trust on eligibility.

8.100.7.F.      Transfers of Assets Without Fair Consideration

1.      Definitions. The following definitions apply to transfers of assets without fair considerations:

        a.      “Assets” include all income and resources of the individual and such individual's spouse,
                including any interest in income or a resource as well as all income or resources which
                the individual or such individual's spouse is entitled to but does not receive because of
                action by any of the following:

                i)       The individual or such individual's spouse,

                ii)      A person, a court, or administrative body with legal authority to act on behalf of
                         the individual or such individual's spouse, or

                iii)     Any person, court or administrative body acting at the direction of or upon the
                         request of the individual or such individual's spouse.




                                                                                                                  108
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                            10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


      b.      “Fair market value” is the value of the asset if sold at the prevailing price at the time it
              was transferred.

      c.      “Fair consideration” is the amount the individual receives in exchange for the asset that is
              transferred, which is equal to or greater than the value of the transferred asset.

      d.      “Look-back period” means the number of months prior to the month of application for
              long-term care services that the Department will consider for transfer of assets.

      e.      “Penalty period” means a period of time for which an applicant or client will not be eligible
              to receive long-term care services.

      f.      “Uncompensated value” shall mean the fair market value of an asset at the time of the
              transfer minus the value of compensation the individual receives in exchange for the
              asset.

      g.      “Valuable consideration” shall mean what an individual receives in exchange for his or
              her right or interest in an asset which has a tangible and/or intrinsic value to the individual
              that is equivalent to or greater than the value of the transferred asset.

2.    General Provisions

      If an institutionalized individual or the spouse of such individual disposes of assets without fair
      consideration on or after the look-back period, the individual shall be subject to a period of
      ineligibility for Long-Term Care services, including Long-Term Care institution care, Home and
      Community Based Services (HCBS), and the Program of All Inclusive Care for the Elderly
      (PACE).

      a.      For transfers made before February 8, 2006, the look-back period is 36 months prior to
              the date of application. For transfers made on or after February 8, 2006, the look-back
              date is 60 months prior to the date of application.

      b.      An institutionalized individual is one who is institutionalized in a medical facility, a Long-
              Term Care institution, or applying for or receiving Home and Community Based Services
              (HCBS) or the Program of All Inclusive Care for the Elderly (PACE).

      c.      If an institutionalized individual or such individual's spouse transfers assets without fair
              consideration on or after the look-back period, the transfer shall be evaluated as follows:

              i)       The fair market value of the transferred asset, less the actual amount received, if
                       any, shall be divided by the average of the regions, defined at 8.100.7.E, monthly
                       private pay cost for Long-Term Care institution care in the state of Colorado at
                       the time of application.

              ii)      The resulting number is the number of months that the individual shall be
                       ineligible for Medical Assistance. For transfers made before February 8, 2006,
                       the period of ineligibility shall begin with the first day of the month following the
                       month in which the transfer occurred. For transfers made on or after February 8,
                       2006, the period of ineligibility shall begin on the later of the following dates:

                       a)      The first day of the month following the month in which the transfer
                               occurred or is discovered. For transfers discovered after the date the
                               transfer occurred, the date of transfer shall be the discovery date.

                               Or;




                                                                                                             109
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                          10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


                    b)       The date on which the individual would initially be eligible for HCBS,
                             PACE or institutional services based on an approved application for such
                             assistance that were it not for the imposition of the penalty period, would
                             be covered by Medical Assistance;

                             And;

                    c)       Which does not occur during any other period of ineligibility for services
                             by reason of a transfer of assets penalty.

      d.    The period of ineligibility shall also include partial months, which shall be calculated by
            multiplying 30 days by the decimal fractional share of the partial month. The result is the
            number of days of ineligibility. For transfers occurring on or after April 1, 2006, the result
            shall be rounded up to the nearest whole number.

      e.    There is no maximum period of ineligibility.

      f.    For transfers prior to February 8, 2006, the total amount of all of the transfers are added
            together and the period of ineligibility begins the first day of the month following the
            month in which the resources are transferred.

            i)      If the previous penalty period has completely expired, the transfers are not added
                    together.

            ii)     If the previous penalty period has not completely expired and the first day of the
                    month following the month in which the resources are transferred is part of a prior
                    penalty period, the new penalty period begins the first day after the prior penalty
                    period expires.

      g.    For transfers on or after February 8, 2006, the total amounts of all of the transfers are
            added together and the penalty period is assessed as outlined in section 8.100.7.F.2.c-
            dabove.

            i)      If the previous penalty period has completely expired, the transfers are not added
                    together.

            ii)     If the previous penalty period has not completely expired and the first day of the
                    month following the month in which the resources are transferred is part of a prior
                    penalty period, the new penalty period begins the first day after the prior penalty
                    period expires.

      h.    The institutionalized individual may continue to be eligible for Supplemental Security
            Income (SSI) and basic Medical Assistance services, but shall not be eligible for Medical
            Assistance for Long-Term Care institution services, Home and Community Based
            Services or the Program of All Inclusive Care for the Elderly due to the transfer without
            fair consideration.

      i.    If a transfer without fair consideration is made during a period of eligibility, a period of
            ineligibility shall be assessed in the same manner as stated above.

      j.    Actions that prevent income or resources from being received, or reduce an individual’s
            ownership, right or interest in an asset such that the individual does not receive valuable
            consideration as set forth on the following list, which is not exclusive, shall create a
            rebuttable presumption that the transfer was without fair consideration:




                                                                                                           110
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                          10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


               i)      Waiving pension income.

               ii)     Waiving a right to receive an inheritance.

               iii)    Preventing access to assets to which an individual is entitled by diverting them to
                       a trust or similar device. This is not applicable to valid income trusts, disability
                       trusts and pooled trusts for individuals under the age of 65 years.

               iv)     Failure of a surviving spouse to elect a share of a spouse's estate or failure to
                       open an estate within 6 months after a spouse’s death.

               v)      Failure to obtain a family allowance or exempt property allowance from an estate
                       of a deceased spouse or parent. Such allowances are presumed to be available
                       3 months after death.

               vi)     Not accepting or accessing a personal injury settlement.

               vii)    Transferring assets into an irrevocable private annuity which was not purchased
                       from a commercial company.

               viii)   Transferring assets into an irrevocable entity such as a Family Limited
                       Partnership which eliminates or restricts the individual's access to the assets.

               ix)     Refusal to take legal action to obtain a court ordered payment that is not being
                       paid, such as child support or alimony, if the benefit outweighs the cost.

               x)      Failure to exercise rights in a Dissolution of Marriage case, which insure an
                       equitable distribution of marital property and income.

               xi)     Purchasing a single-premium life insurance policy, endowment policy or similar
                       instrument within the look-back period, which has no cash value, and for which
                       the individual receives no valuable consideration shall be considered an
                       uncompensated transfer. The total amount of the purchase price shall be
                       considered a transfer without fair consideration.

8.100.7.G.     Treatment of Certain Assets as Transfers Without Fair Consideration

1.     Promissory notes established before April 1, 2006:

       a.      The fair market value of promissory notes is a countable resource and must be evaluated
               in accordance with the regulations on consideration of resources in this volume.

       b.      Promissory notes with one or more of the following provisions, indicating they have little
               or no market value, shall create a rebuttable presumption of a transfer without fair
               consideration:

               i)      An interest rate lower than the prevailing market rate.

               ii)     A term for repayment longer than the life expectancy of the holder of the note, as
                       determined by the tables at 8.100.7.J.for annuities purchased on or after
                       February 8, 2006.

               iii)    Low payments.

               iv)     Cancellation at the death of the note holder.




                                                                                                           111
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                          10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


      c.      Promissory notes which have been appraised by a note broker as having little or no value
              shall create a rebuttable presumption of a transfer without fair consideration.

2.    Promissory notes established on or after April 1, 2006 but before March 1, 2007

      a.      Subject to the look-back date described in section 8.100.7.F.2.b for the purpose of
              calculating the penalty period of ineligibility for a transfer without fair consideration, the
              value of a promissory note, loan or mortgage which does not meet the criteria in section
              8.100.5.M.3.n. is the outstanding balance due as of the date of the individual’s application
              for Medical Assistance for services, described in section 8.100.7.F.2.c.

3.    Promissory notes established on or after March 1, 2007

      a.      Subject to the look-back date described in section 8.100.7.F.2.b, for the purpose of
              calculating the penalty period of ineligibility for a transfer without fair consideration, the
              value of a promissory note, loan or mortgage which does not meet the criteria in section
              8.100.5.M.3.o. is the outstanding balance due as of the date of the individual’s application
              for Medical Assistance for services, described in section 8.100.7.F.2.c..

4.    Personal care services

      a.      Effective for agreements that were signed and notarized prior to March 1, 2007, family
              members who provide assistance or services are presumed to do so for love and
              affection, and compensation for past assistance or services shall create a rebuttable
              presumption of a transfer without fair consideration unless the compensation is in
              accordance with the following:

              i)      A written agreement must be executed prior to the delivery of services.

              ii)     The agreement must be signed by the applicant, or a legally authorized
                      representative, such as agent under a power of attorney, guardian, or
                      conservator. If the agreement is signed by a representative, that representative
                      may not be a beneficiary of the agreement.

              iii)    The agreement must be dated and the signature must be notarized; and

              iv)     Compensation for services rendered must be comparable to what is received in
                      the open market.

      b.      Effective for agreements that are signed and notarized on or after March 1, 2007,
              compensation under personal service agreements will be deemed to be a transfer without
              fair consideration unless the following requirements are met:

              i)      A written agreement was executed prior to the delivery of services; and

                      a)       The agreement must be signed by the applicant, or a legally authorized
                               representative, such as agent under a power of attorney, guardian, or
                               conservator. If the agreement is signed by a representative, that
                               representative may not be a beneficiary of the agreement; and

                      b)       The legally authorized representative, agent, guardian, conservator, or
                               other representative of the applicant’s estate may not be a beneficiary of
                               a care agreement; and




                                                                                                        112
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                           10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


                       c)      The agreement specifies the type, frequency and time to be spent
                               providing the services agreed to in exchange for the payment or
                               transferred item; and

                       d)      The agreement provides for payment of services on a regular basis, no
                               less frequently than monthly, while the services are being provided; and

              ii)      Compensation for services rendered must be comparable to what is received in
                       the open market. The burden is on the applicant to prove that the compensation
                       is reasonable and comparable; and

              iii)     A record or log is provided which details the actual services rendered. The
                       services cannot be services that duplicate services that another party is being
                       paid to provide or which another party is responsible to provide.

      c.      Payment for services, which were rendered previously and for which no compensation
              was made, shall be considered as a transfer without fair consideration.

      d.      Assets transferred in exchange for a contract for personal services for future assistance
              after the date of application are considered available resources.

      e.      A care agreement must be entered into, signed, and notarized prior to providing any
              services for which a beneficiary will be compensated.

5.    Transfers of real property into joint tenancy without fair consideration

      a.      If real property is transferred into joint tenancy with right of survivorship with one or more
              joint tenants, the amount transferred depends on the number of joint tenants to whom the
              property is transferred. The following are examples:

              i)       If the transfer is to one joint tenant, the amount transferred is equal to one-half of
                       the value of the property at the time of the transfer.

              ii)      If the transfer is to two joint tenants, the amount transferred is equal to two-thirds
                       of the value.

              iii)     If the transfer is to three joint tenants, the amount transferred is equal to three-
                       fourths of the value of the property at the time of the transfer.

      b.      If the transfer is completed with two deeds or transactions, the first of which transfers a
              fractional share of the property into tenancy in common, and the second into joint
              tenancy, the amount transferred shall be determined in the same manner as set forth
              above.

6.    No period of ineligibility will be imposed if the individual transferred the assets under any of
      following circumstances:

      a.      The asset transferred was a home and title to the home was transferred to:

              i)       The spouse of such individual;

              ii)      A child of such individual who is either

                       1)      Under the age of 21 years, or




                                                                                                          113
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                        10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


                    2)       Is blind or totally and permanently disabled as determined by the Social
                             Security Administration.

            iii)    A brother or sister

                    1)       Who has an equity interest in the home and

                    2)       Who was residing in such individual's home for at least one year
                             immediately before the date that the individual becomes institutionalized.

            iv)     A son or a daughter of such individual

                    1)       Who was residing in the home for a period of at least two years
                             immediately before the date the individual becomes institutionalized and

                    2)       Who provided care to such individual by objective evidence, that
                             permitted such individual to reside at home rather than in an institution.

                    3)       Documentation shall be submitted proving that the son or daughter's sole
                             residence was the home of the parent. The parent's attending
                             physician(s) or professional health provider(s) during the past two years
                             must substantiate in writing that the care was provided, and that the care
                             prevented the parent from requiring placement in a Long-Term Care
                             institution.

      b.    The assets were transferred:

            i)      To the individual's spouse or to another for the sole benefit of the individual's
                    spouse.

            ii)     From the individual's spouse to another for the sole benefit of the individual's
                    spouse.

            iii)    To a trust which is established solely for benefit of the individual's child who is
                    determined to be blind or totally disabled by the Social Security Administration or
                    to that child directly for the sole benefit of the child.

            iv)     To a trust established solely for the benefit of an individual under 65 years of age
                    who is determined to be blind or totally disabled by the Social Security
                    Administration.

      c.    Definition of the term “for the sole benefit of,” as used in the preceding exceptions to the
            transfer penalty rules:

            i).     A transfer or a trust is considered to be for the sole benefit of the spouse, blind or
                    disabled child, or a disabled individual if the transfer is arranged in such a way
                    that no individual or entity except the spouse, blind or disabled child, or disabled
                    individual can benefit from the assets transferred in any way, whether at the time
                    of the transfer or at any time in the future.

            ii).    To insure that the asset transferred is for the sole benefit of the spouse, blind or
                    disabled child or disabled individual, the following criteria must be met:

                    1)       The transfer must be accomplished by a written instrument which legally
                             binds the parties to a specified course of action and sets forth:




                                                                                                        114
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                         10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


                              a)      The conditions under which the transfer was made, and

                              b)      A statement as to whom can benefit from the transfer.

                      2)      The written instrument must provide for the spending of funds or use of
                              the transferred assets for the benefit of the individual on a basis that is
                              actuarially sound based on the life expectancy of the individual.

                      3)      Disability trusts and income trusts, which designate the Colorado
                              Department of Health Care Policy and Financing as the remainder
                              beneficiary up to the amount of Medical Assistance paid on behalf of the
                              individual, are exempt from this requirement.

                      4)      A community spouse to whom a Community Spouse Resource
                              Allowance has been transferred does not have to provide a written
                              document or comply with the requirement that the transfer is actuarially
                              sound. However, the Community Spouse Resource Allowance must be
                              for the sole benefit of the community spouse to whom it is transferred.
                              Upon the death of the community spouse, those resources shall be
                              made available to the surviving spouse, at least up to the amount of the
                              elective share of the augmented estate, the family allowance and the
                              exempt property allowance.

7.    There is a rebuttable presumption the transfer without fair consideration was made for purposes
      of Medical Assistance eligibility or avoiding the medical assistance estate recovery program.

      a.      The presumption that an asset was transferred to establish or maintain Medicaid eligibility
              or to avoid the medical assistance estate recovery program is rebutted only if the
              individual or individual’s spouse demonstrates by providing convincing evidence that the
              asset was transferred exclusively for some other purpose and the reason for the transfer
              did not include Medical Assistance eligibility or avoidance of medical assistance estate
              recovery..

      b.      A subjective statement of intent or ignorance of the transfer penalty or verbal assurances
              that the individual was not considering Medical Assistance eligibility when the transfer
              was made are not sufficient.

      c.      There is a rebuttable presumption that transfers without fair consideration were made for
              the purpose of Medical Assistance eligibility in the following cases:

              i)      In any case in which the individual's assets and the assets of the individual's
                      spouse remaining after the transfer total an amount insufficient to meet all living
                      expenses and medical expenses reasonably expected to be incurred by the
                      individual or the individual's spouse in the sixty (60) months following the
                      transfer. Medical expenses include the cost of Long-Term Care unless the future
                      necessity of such care could have been absolutely precluded because of the
                      particular circumstances.

              ii)     In any case where:

                      1)      the transfer was made on behalf of the individual or the individual's
                              spouse;

                      2)      the transfer was made by:




                                                                                                       115
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                              10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


                                a)       the individual or individual’s spouse

                                b)       a guardian,

                                c)       a conservator, or

                                d)       agent under a power of attorney; and

                       3)       the transfer was made to:

                                a)       anyone related to the individual or individual’s spouse by birth,
                                         adoption or marriage, other than between the individual and the
                                         individual’s spouse; or to

                                b)       anyone related to the guardian, conservator, or agent under a
                                         power of attorney by birth, adoption or marriage.

      d.       Convincing evidence may include, but is not limited to, verification which establishes:

               i)      That at the time of the transfer the individual could not have anticipated needing
                       long term Medical Assistance due to the existence of other circumstances which
                       would have precluded the need.

               ii)     Other assets were available at the time of the transfer to meet current and future
                       needs of the individual, including the cost of Long-Term Care institution or other
                       institutionalized care for a period of sixty (60) months.

               iii)    The specific purpose for which the assets were transferred and the reason the
                       transfer was necessary and the reason there was no alternative but to transfer
                       the assets without fair consideration.

8.    Apportionment of penalty period between spouses

      a.       If a transfer results in a period of ineligibility for an individual, and the individual's spouse
               becomes institutionalized and is otherwise eligible for Medical Assistance, the period of
               ineligibility shall be apportioned equally between the spouses.

      b.       If one spouse dies or is no longer institutionalized, any months remaining in the period of
               ineligibility shall be assigned to the spouse who remains institutionalized.

9.    If the individual or the individual's spouse has transferred assets into a trust or is a beneficiary of
      a trust, the trust document shall be submitted to the Colorado Department of Health Care Policy
      and Financing to determine the effect of the trust on Medical Assistance eligibility.

10.   Notice

      a.       The Colorado Department of Health Care Policy and Financing is an interested person
               according to 15-14-406, C.R.S. or a successor statute.

      b.       As an interested party, the department shall be given notice of a hearing in cases in
               which Medical Assistance planning or Medical Assistance eligibility is set forth in the
               petition as a factor for requesting court authority to transfer property.




                                                                                                             116
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                         10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


11.   Undue Hardship

      a.    The period of ineligibility resulting from the imposition of the transfer or the trust
            provisions may be waived if denial of eligibility would create an undue hardship for an
            individual who is otherwise eligible. Undue hardship can be established if application of
            the transfer penalty would:

            i)      deprive the individual of medical care such that the individual’s health or life
                    would be endangered; or

            ii)     deprive the individual of food, clothing, shelter or other necessities of life.

      b.    Undue hardship shall not exist when the application of the trust or transfer rules merely
            causes the individual inconvenience or when such application might restrict his or her
            lifestyle but would not put him or her at risk of serious deprivation.

      c.    Notice of an undue hardship exception shall be given to the applicant or client. The
            Eligibility Site shall make a determination on the request within 15 working days from
            when the request is received. The Eligibility Site shall issue a notice of action on the
            determination of hardship. An adverse determination may be appealed in accordance
            with the appeal process as described at Section 8.057 of this volume.

      d.    The facility in which an institutionalized individual is residing may file an undue hardship
            waiver application on behalf of the individual with the individual's or his or her personal
            representative's consent. Where the individual is unable to give consent and where the
            personal representative of the individual has a conflict of interest concerning the
            particular circumstance giving rise to the period of ineligibility, the facility may request an
            undue hardship on behalf of the individual. An example of such a conflict of interest
            would be a situation where the personal representative who is also an agent under a
            power of attorney transfers property to himself or herself. The facility shall submit the
            undue hardship request to the Eligibility Site and give sufficient detail of the circumstance
            surrounding the conflict of interest and the information required below to the Eligibility
            Site. These provisions are not intended to change the Department’s requirements under
            Section 8.057 of the Department’s regulations as to who has standing to file an appeal.

      e.    An individual or representative may request that the Eligibility Site waive a transfer
            penalty on the basis of undue hardship. The request shall be made in writing to the
            applicant’s or client’s Eligibility Site case worker. The individual making the request has
            the burden of proof and must provide clear and convincing evidence to substantiate the
            circumstances surrounding the transfer, attempts to recover the assets, and the impact of
            the denial of Medicaid payments for Long-Term Care services. The request and
            documentation shall include all of the following:

            i)      the reason(s) for the transfer including the individual’s participation in the transfer
                    or grant of legal authority to another that gave rise to the transfer, and the
                    relationship between the transferor and transferee;

            ii)     evidence to prove that the assets have been irretrievably lost and that all
                    reasonable attempts made to recover the asset(s), including any legal actions
                    and the results of the attempts, including but not limited to a request for an adult
                    protection investigation (such as in a case of financial exploitation), filing a police
                    report, or filing a civil action have been exhausted or have been or are being
                    pursued; and,




                                                                                                       117
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                           10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


               iii)    documentation such as a notice of discharge or pending discharge from the
                       facility and a physician’s statement detailing how the inability to receive nursing
                       facility or community based services would result in the individual’s inability to
                       obtain life-sustaining medical care or that the individual would not be able to
                       obtain food, clothing or shelter.

       f.      To the extent that the transferred assets are recovered pursuant to the attempts in (e)(ii)
               above, the individual shall reimburse Medicaid for the funds expended as a result of an
               approved undue hardship request.

       g.      If the transferee and the transferor of the assets for which the transfer penalty is being
               imposed are related parties there shall be a rebuttable presumption that the transferred
               assets are not irretrievably lost as required under (e)(ii) above. Related parties are
               described in Section 8.100.7.G.7.c.ii of these regulations.

12.    No period of ineligibility shall be assessed in any of the following circumstances:

       a.      Convincing and objective evidence is provided that the individual intended to dispose of
               the resources either at fair market value or for other fair consideration.

       b.      Convincing and objective evidence is presented proving that the resources were
               transferred exclusively for a purpose other than to qualify or remain eligible for Medical
               Assistance.

       c.      All of the resources transferred without fair consideration have been returned to the
               individual.

       d.      For assets transferred before February 8, 2006, the assets were transferred more than
               36 months prior to the date of application.

       e.      For assets transferred before February 8, 2006, the penalty period has expired based on
               the following formula: The fair market value of the transferred asset is divided by the
               average cost of Long Term Care institution care in the state at the time of application and
               the resulting number of months of ineligibility has ended prior to the date of application.

8.100.7.H.     Life Estates

1.     Definitions

       a.      “Fair Market Value” means the amount for which a property or interest in a property could
               reasonably be expected to sell on the open market.

       b.      “Life Estate.” A life estate conveys upon a grantee certain rights in property measured by
               the life of the life estate holder or of some other person. The owner of a life estate has the
               right to possess the property, the right to use the property, the right to obtain profits from
               the property, and the right to sell the life estate interest in the property. The establishment
               of a life estate on a property results in the creation of two interests: a life estate interest
               and a remainder interest.

       c.      “Remainder Interest” means an interest in property created at the time a life estate is
               established which gives the holder of the interest the right to ownership of the property
               upon the death of the life estate holder. An individual holding a remainder interest is free
               to sell his or her interest in the property unless the sale is restricted by the terms of the
               instrument which established the remainder interest.




                                                                                                          118
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                        10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


2.    General Provisions

      a.     Life Estates Established before July 1, 1995

             i)      Transfer without fair consideration Treatment

                     1)      The establishment of a life estate before July 1, 1995 by an individual or
                             individual’s spouse shall not be considered a transfer without fair
                             consideration.

             ii)     Resource Treatment

                     1)      A life estate owned by an individual or individual’s spouse that was
                             established on exempt property shall be considered to be an exempt
                             resource.

                     2)      A life estate owned by an individual or individual’s spouse that was
                             established on countable property shall be considered a countable
                             resource.

                             i)       The value of the life estate shall be determined by using the
                                      methodology described at 8.100.7.H.3.

                     3)      A remainder interest held by an individual or individual’s spouse on
                             exempt property shall be considered an exempt resource.

                     4)      A remainder interest held by an individual or individual’s spouse on
                             countable property shall be considered a countable resource

                             i)       The value of the remainder interest shall be determined by using
                                      the methodology described at 8.100.7.H.4.a.

      b.     Life Estates Established on or after July 1, 1995

             i)      Transfer without fair consideration Treatment

                     1)      The establishment of a life estate on or after July 1, 1995 on property
                             owned by an individual or individual’s spouse shall be considered a
                             transfer without fair consideration if the life estate was established within
                             the look-back period described at 8.100.7.F.2.b.

                             a)       For the purpose of determining the transfer without fair
                                      consideration penalty period, the amount of the transfer shall be
                                      based on the value of the remainder interest, as calculated using
                                      the methodology described at 8.100.7.H.4.a.

                     2)      The purchase of a life estate interest in a home not owned by an
                             individual or individual’s spouse on or after April 1, 2006 within the look-
                             back period described at 8.100.7.F.2.b. shall be considered a transfer
                             without fair consideration unless the purchaser lives in the home for a
                             period of at least twelve (12) consecutive months after the date of the
                             purchase.




                                                                                                       119
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                           10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


                               a)      For the purpose of determining the transfer without fair
                                       consideration penalty period, the amount of the transfer shall be
                                       the entire amount used to purchase the life estate.

                               b)      If the payment for the life estate exceeds the value of the life
                                       estate, as calculated using the methodology described at
                                       8.100.7.H.3, then the difference between the amount paid and
                                       the value of the life estate shall be considered to be a transfer
                                       without fair consideration.

              ii)     Resource Treatment

                      1)       A life estate owned by an individual or individual’s spouse that was
                               established on exempt property shall be considered an exempt resource.

                      2)       A life estate owned by an individual or individual’s spouse that was
                               established on countable property shall be considered a countable
                               resource.

                               a)      The value of the life estate shall be determined by using the
                                       methodology described at 8.100.7.H.3.a.

                      3)       A remainder interest held by an individual or individual’s spouse on
                               exempt property shall be considered an exempt resource.

                      5)       A remainder interest held by an individual or individual’s spouse on
                               countable property shall be considered a countable resource

                               a)      The value of the remainder interest shall be determined by using
                                       the methodology described at 8.100.7.H.4.

3.    Determining the Value of a Life Estate

      a.      The value of a life estate interest is calculated using the following method:

              i)      Determine the fair market value of the property on which the life estate was
                      established. The fair market value shall be obtained by using the most recent
                      actual value reported by the county assessor or from the most recent property
                      assessment notice. If the actual value is not shown on the property assessment
                      notice, the assessed value shall be divided by the appropriate property
                      assessment rate to obtain the market value.

              ii)     Multiply the fair market value of the property by the “Life Estate” factor in Column
                      1 from the Life Estate Table at 8.100.7.H.5, in this section, that corresponds to
                      the life estate holder’s age as of his or her last birthday. The result is the value of
                      the life estate interest.

      b.      If a life estate was established on property held by spouses in joint tenancy, then the age
              of the youngest individual shall be used to calculate the value of the life estate.

4.    Determining the Value of a Remainder Interest

      a.      The value of a remainder interest is calculated using the following method:




                                                                                                         120
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                             10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


                i)      Determine the fair market value of the property on which the remainder interest
                        was established. The fair market value shall be obtained by using the most
                        recent actual value reported by the county assessor or from the most recent
                        property assessment notice. If the market value is not shown on the property
                        assessment notice, the assessed value shall be divided by the appropriate
                        property assessment rate to obtain the market value.

                ii)     Multiply the fair market value of the property by the “Remainder” factor in Column
                        2 from the Life Estate Table at 8.100.7.H.5, in this section, that corresponds to
                        the life estate holder’s age as of his or her last birthday. The result is the value of
                        the remainder interest.

        b.      If a life estate was established on property held by spouses in joint tenancy, then the age
                of the youngest individual shall be used to calculate the value of the remainder interest.

5.      Life Estate Table

        This rule incorporates by reference the Social Security life estate and remainder interest table
        effective April 1999 to the present. The incorporation of the table excludes later amendments, or
        editions of, the referenced material.

        The Social Security life estate and remainder interest tables are available at
        http://policy.ssa.gov/poms.nsf/lnx/0501140120

        Pursuant to § 24-4-103 (12.5), C.R.S., the Department maintains copies of the incorporated text
        in its entirety, available for public inspection during regular business hours at: Colorado
        Department of Health Care Policy and Financing, 1570 Grant Street, Denver, CO 80203. Certified
        copies of incorporated materials are provided at cost upon request.

8.100.7.I.      Annuities

1.      DEFINITIONS

        a.      “Annuity” means a contract between an individual and a commercial company in which
                the individual invests funds and in return receives installments for life or for a specified
                number of years.

        b.      “Annuitant” means an individual who is entitled to receive payments from an annuity.

        c.      “Annuitization Period” means the period of time during which an annuity makes payments
                to an annuitant.

        d.      “Annuitized” means an annuity that has become irrevocable and is making payments to
                an annuitant.

        e.      “Assignable” means an annuity that can have its owner and/or annuitant changed.

        f.      “Balloon Payment” means a lump sum equal to the initial annuity premium less any
                distributions paid out before the end of an annuitization period.

        g.      “Beneficiary” means an individual or individuals entitled to receive any remaining
                payments from an annuity upon the death of the annuitant.

        h.      “Department” means the Department of Health Care Policy and Financing, its
                successor(s), or its designee(s).




                                                                                                           121
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                         10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


      i.      “Irrevocable” means an annuity that cannot be canceled, revoked, terminated, or
              surrendered under any circumstances.

      j.      “Non-assignable” means an annuity that cannot have its owner and/or annuitant changed
              under any circumstances.

      k.      “Owner” means the person who may exercise the rights provided in an annuity contract
              during the life of the annuitant. An owner can generally name himself or herself or
              another person as the annuitant.

      l.      “Revocable” means an annuity that can be canceled, revoked, terminated, or
              surrendered.

      m.      “Transaction” means:

              i)      The purchase of an annuity;

              ii)     The addition of principal to an annuity;

              iii)    Elective withdrawals from an annuity;

              iv)     Requests to change the distributions from an annuity;

              v)      Elections to annuitize an annuity contract; or

              vi)     Any other action taken by an individual that changes the course of payments
                      made by an annuity or the treatment of income or principal of an annuity.

2.    Annuities purchased on or before June 30, 1995

      a.      A revocable or irrevocable annuity established on or before June 30, 1995 is not a
              countable resource if it is annuitized and regular returns are being received by the
              annuitant.

              i)      Payments from the annuity to the individual or individual’s spouse are income in
                      the month received.

      b.      A revocable or irrevocable annuity established on or before June 30, 1995 is a countable
              resource if it has not been annuitized.

3.    Annuities Established on or after July 1, 1995 but before February 8, 2006

      a.      The purchase of an annuity shall be considered to be a transfer without fair consideration
              unless the following criteria are met:

              i)      The annuity is purchased from a life insurance company or other commercial
                      company that sells annuities as part of its normal course of business;

              ii)     The annuity is annuitized for the individual or individual’s spouse;

              iii)    The annuity is purchased on the life of the individual or individual’s spouse; and

              iv)     The annuity provides payments for a period not exceeding the annuitant’s
                      projected life expectancy based on life expectancy tables described at 8.100.7.J.




                                                                                                      122
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                            10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


      b.      To determine if a transfer without fair consideration has occurred in the purchase of an
              annuity, the Eligibility Site shall:

              i)      Determine the date on which the annuity was purchased;

              ii)     Determine the amount of money used to purchase the annuity and the length of
                      the annuitization period;

              iii)    Determine the age of the annuitant at the time the annuity was purchased; and

              iv)     Determine the life expectancy of the annuitant at the time the annuity was
                      purchased using the appropriate life expectancy table described at 8.100.7.J.

                      1)       If the length of the annuitization period exceeds the annuitant’s life
                               expectancy, then a transfer without fair consideration exists for the
                               portion of the annuitization period that exceeds the annuitant’s life
                               expectancy.

                      2)       If the total value of the annuity’s payments during the annuitization period
                               is less than the original purchase price of the annuity, then the difference
                               shall be considered to be a transfer without fair consideration.

                      3)       If the total value of the annuity’s payments during the annuitization period
                               is equal to or greater than the original purchase price of the annuity, then
                               the purchase of the annuity shall not be considered to be a transfer
                               without fair consideration. However, any payments made by the annuity
                               shall be considered to be countable income in the month received.

                      4)       If the annuity was purchased more than 36 months before the date of
                               application for Medicaid, then there is no transfer without fair
                               consideration penalty period. However, any payments made by the
                               annuity shall be considered to be countable income in the month
                               received.

4.    Annuities Established on or after April 1, 1998 but before February 8, 2006

      a.      The Eligibility Site shall determine the Minimum Monthly Maintenance Needs Allowance
              (MMMNA) of the community spouse, if applicable.

              i)      If the monthly payment amount provided by the annuity to the community spouse
                      exceeds the MMMNA, then the amount of the annuity which causes the monthly
                      annuity payment to exceed the MMMNA shall be considered to be a transfer
                      without fair consideration in determining the institutionalized spouse’s eligibility.
                      This applies only to the extent that the transferred amount causes the
                      Community Spouse Resource Allowance to exceed the maximum.

      b.      The Eligibility Site shall determine if the Individual is receiving substantially equal
              installments from the annuity for the annuitization period of the annuity.

              i)      If the annuity is not paid in substantially equal installments, then the original
                      purchase price of the annuity shall be considered to be a transfer without fair
                      consideration.

      c.      If the annuity was purchased more than 36 months before the date of application for
              Medicaid, then there is no transfer without fair consideration penalty period.




                                                                                                          123
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                          10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


             i)      Any payments made by the annuity shall be considered to be countable income
                     in the month received.

5.    Annuities Purchased on or after February 8, 2006

      a.     As a condition of Medicaid eligibility, at the time of application or redetermination, an
             applicant or his or her spouse for Medicaid Long-Term Care services shall disclose any
             interest that the Medicaid applicant or his or her spouse has in an annuity.

             i)      A complete copy of the annuity contract, including the most recent beneficiary
                     designation, shall be provided to the eligibility site.

      b.     By providing Medicaid Long-Term Care services, the Department shall be a remainder
             beneficiary of any annuity in which an individual or individual’s spouse has an interest.
             The purchase of the annuity shall not be considered to be a transfer without fair
             consideration if:

             i)      The Department is named as the remainder beneficiary in the first position for the
                     total amount of medical assistance paid on behalf of the individual; or

             ii)     The Department is named as the remainder beneficiary in the next position after
                     the community spouse or minor or disabled child.

             iii)    This provision shall not apply to annuities that are revocable and/or assignable.

      c.     The Eligibility Site shall notify the issuer of the annuity that the Department is a preferred
             remainder beneficiary in the annuity for medical assistance provided to the
             institutionalized individual. This notice shall include a statement requiring the issuer to
             notify the Eligibility Site of any changes in the amount of income or principal that is being
             withdrawn from the annuity or any other transactions, as defined at 8.100.7.I.1.,
             regardless of when the annuity was purchased.

      d.     If the Department is not named on the annuity as a remainder beneficiary, then the value
             of funds used to purchase the annuity shall be deemed a transfer without fair
             consideration and shall be subject to the penalty period provisions described at
             8.100.7.F.

             i)      This provision shall not apply to annuities that are revocable and/or assignable.

      e.     Revocable Annuities

             i)      A revocable annuity is a countable resource. The value of the annuity is the total
                     value of the annuity principal plus any accumulated interest.

                     a)       If the annuity includes a surrender charge or other financial penalty
                              (other than tax withholding or a tax penalty) for withdrawing funds from
                              the annuity, then the value of the annuity is the net amount the individual
                              would receive upon full surrender of the annuity.

             ii)     Payments from a revocable annuity are not countable as income.

      f.     Irrevocable Assignable Annuities




                                                                                                        124
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                       10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


            i)     An irrevocable assignable annuity is a countable resource. The value of the
                   annuity is presumed to be the total value of the annuity principal plus any
                   accumulated interest.

                   a)      An individual or individual’s spouse can rebut the presumption by
                           providing documented offers from at least three companies who are
                           active in the market for buying and selling annuities an annuity income
                           streams. The value of the annuity shall then be the highest of the offers.

                   b)      Any payments from an irrevocable assignable annuity that is considered
                           to be a countable resource are not considered to be countable income.

            ii)    An individual or individual’s spouse can rebut the presumption that an irrevocable
                   assignable annuity is not a countable resource by providing documented offers
                   from at least three companies who are active in the market for buying and selling
                   annuities and annuity income streams stating their unwillingness or inability to
                   purchase the annuity or annuity income stream.

                   a)      Any payments from an irrevocable assignable annuity that is not
                           considered to be a countable resource are considered to be countable
                           income in the month received.

      g.    Irrevocable Non-Assignable Annuities

            i)     An irrevocable non-assignable annuity is not considered to be a countable
                   resource.

            ii)    Payments from an irrevocable non-assignable annuity are considered countable
                   income in the month received.

            iii)   An irrevocable non-assignable annuity purchased by or for the benefit of a
                   community spouse shall not be considered to be a transfer without fair
                   consideration if:

                   1)      The Department is named as the remainder beneficiary in the first
                           position for the total amount of medical assistance paid on behalf of the
                           institutionalized individual; or

                   2)      The Department is named as the remainder beneficiary in the second
                           position after the community spouse or minor or disabled child and is
                           named in the first position if such spouse or a representative of such
                           child disposes of any such remainder without fair consideration.

            iv)    An irrevocable non-assignable annuity purchased by or for the benefit of an
                   institutionalized individual shall not be considered to be a transfer without fair
                   consideration if:

                   1)      The Department is named as the remainder beneficiary in the first
                           position for the total amount of medical assistance paid on behalf of the
                           institutionalized individual; or

                   2)      The Department is named as the remainder beneficiary in the second
                           position after the community spouse or minor or disabled child and is
                           named in the first position if such spouse or a representative of such
                           child disposes of any such remainder without fair consideration.




                                                                                                        125
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                     10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


            v)    In addition to the requirements listed at 8.100.7.I.5.g.iv) for naming the
                  Department as remainder beneficiary, an irrevocable non-assignable annuity
                  purchased by or for the benefit of an institutionalized individual shall not be
                  considered to be a transfer without fair consideration if the annuity meets any
                  one of the following conditions:

                  1)      The annuity is considered either:

                          a)      An Individual Retirement Annuity as described in Section 408(b)
                                  of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986; or

                          b)      A deemed Individual Retirement Account under a qualified
                                  employer plan described in Section 408(q) of the Internal
                                  Revenue Code of 1986; or

                  2)      The annuity is purchased with proceeds from one of the following:

                          a)      An Individual Retirement Account as described in Section 408(a)
                                  of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986; or

                          b)      An account established by an employer or association of
                                  employers as described in Section 408(c) of the Internal
                                  Revenue Code of 1986; or

                          c)      A simple retirement account as described in Section 408(p) of
                                  the Internal Revenue Code of 1986; or

                          d)      A simplified employee pension plan as described in Section
                                  408(k) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986; or

                          e)      A Roth IRA as described in Section 408A of the Internal
                                  Revenue Code of 1986; or

                  3)      The annuity meets all of the following requirements:

                          a)      The annuity is irrevocable and non-assignable; and

                          b)      The annuity is actuarially sound based on the life expectancy
                                  tables described at 8.100.7.J.; and

                          c)      The annuity provides for payments in equal amounts during the
                                  term of the annuity with no deferral and no balloon payments
                                  made.

            vi)   If an irrevocable non-assignable annuity is considered to be a transfer without fair
                  consideration, then, for the purpose of calculating the transfer without fair
                  consideration penalty period, the value that was transferred shall be the amount
                  of funds used to purchase the annuity.




                                                                                                    126
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                            10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


        h.      Annuity Transactions

                i)      If an Individual or individual’s spouse undertakes any transaction, as defined at
                        8.100.7.I.1. which has the effect of changing the course of payments to be made
                        by an annuity or the treatment of income or principal of the annuity, such a
                        transaction shall be deemed to be a transfer without fair consideration,
                        regardless of when the annuity was originally purchased. For the purpose of
                        calculating the transfer without fair consideration penalty period, the value that
                        was transferred shall be the amount used to purchase the annuity.

                        a)       Routine changes such as a notification of an address change or death or
                                 divorce of a remainder beneficiary are excluded from treatment as a
                                 transfer without fair consideration.

                        b)       Changes which occur based on the terms of the annuity which existed
                                 before February 8, 2006 and which do not require a decision, election, or
                                 action to take effect are excluded from treatment as a transfer without
                                 fair consideration.

                        c)       Changes which are beyond the control of the individual, such as a
                                 change in law, a change in the policies of the annuity issuer, or a change
                                 in terms based on other factors, such as the annuity issuer’s financial
                                 condition, are excluded from treatment as a transfer without fair
                                 consideration.

8.100.7.J.      Life Expectancy Tables

        This rule incorporates by reference the Social Security Office of the Chief Actuary Period Life
        Table 2011 for both males and females. The incorporation of the table excludes later
        amendments, or editions of, the referenced material.

        The Social Security Office of the Chief Actuary Period Life Table 2011 is available at
        www.ssa.gov/oact/STATS/table4c6.html.

        Pursuant to § 24-4-103 (12.5), C.R.S., the Department maintains copies of the incorporated text
        in its entirety, available for public inspection during regular business hours at: Colorado
        Department of Health Care Policy and Financing, 1570 Grant Street, Denver, CO 80203. Certified
        copies of incorporated materials are provided at cost upon request.

8.100.7.K.    Spousal Protection - Treatment of Income and Resources for Institutionalized
        Spouses

1.      The spousal protection regulations apply to married couples where one spouse is institutionalized
        or likely to be institutionalized for at least 30 consecutive days and the other spouse remains in
        the community. Being a community spouse does not prohibit Medicaid eligibility if all criteria are
        met. The community spouse resource allowance does not supersede the Medicaid eligibility
        criteria.

2.      For purposes of spousal protection, an institutionalized spouse is an individual who:

        a.      Begins a stay in a medical institution or nursing facility on or after September 30, 1989, or

        b.      Is first enrolled as a Medical Assistance client in the Program of All Inclusive Care for the
                Elderly (PACE) on or after October 10, 1997, or




                                                                                                          127
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                            10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


        c.      Receives Home and Community Based Services on or after July 1, 1999; and

        d.      Is married to a spouse who is not in a medical institution or nursing facility; but does not
                include any such individual who is not likely to meet the requirements of subparagraphs
                8.100.7.K.2.a thru c for at least 30 consecutive days.

3.      A community spouse is defined as the spouse of an institutionalized spouse.

8.100.7.L.      Assessment and Documentation of The Couple's Resources

        An assessment of the total value of the couple’s resources shall be completed at the time of initial
        Medical Assistance application or when requested by either spouse of a married couple. All non-
        exempt resources owned by a married couple are counted, whether owned jointly or individually.
        There are no exceptions for legal separation, pre-nuptial, or post-nuptial agreements. Once the
        applicant is approved, the Community Spouses’ resources are not reviewed again unless the
        Community Spouse applies for Medical Assistance.

8.100.7.M.      Calculation of the Community Spouse Resource Allowance

1.      A Community Spouse Resource Allowance (CSRA) shall be allocated based on the total
        resources owned by the couple as of the time of Medical Assistance application. The CSRA is
        established at intake only, and; once approved the community spouse’s resources are not
        considered again until the community spouse applies for Medical Assistance. This is true even if
        the community spouse becomes institutionalized but does not apply for Medical Assistance. In
        calculating the amount of the CSRA, resources shall not be attributed to the community spouse
        based upon state laws relating to community property or the division of marital property.

        For persons whose Medical Assistance application is for an individual who meets the definition of
        an institutionalized spouse, the CSRA is the largest of the following amounts:

        a.      The total resources of the couple but no more than the current maximum allowance
                which, changes each year beginning January 1st.; or

        b.      The increased CSRA calculated pursuant to section 8.100.7.S; or

        c.      The amount a court has ordered the institutionalized spouse to transfer to the community
                spouse for monthly support of the community spouse or a dependent family member.

2.      The resources allotted to the community spouse as the CSRA shall be transferred into the name
        of the community spouse and shall not be considered available to the institutionalized spouse.
        After the transfer of the CSRA to the community spouse, the income from these resources shall
        be attributed to the community spouse.

3.      The transfer of the CSRA shall be completed as soon as possible, but no later than the next
        redetermination when the community spouse becomes institutionalizes; whichever is earlier. If the
        transfer is not completed within this time period, the resources shall be attributed to the
        institutionalized spouse and shall affect his/her Medical Assistance eligibility. Verification of the
        transfer of assets to the community spouse shall be provided to the eligibility site.

        The institutionalized spouse may transfer the resources allotted to the community spouse as the
        CSRA to another person for the sole benefit of the community spouse.

4.      If the community spouse is in control of resources attributed to the institutionalized spouse, but
        fails to make such resources available for his/her cost of care, this fact shall not make the
        institutionalized spouse ineligible for Medical Assistance, where:




                                                                                                          128
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                            10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


        a.      The institutionalized spouse has assigned The Department any rights to support from the
                community spouse; or

        b.      The institutionalized spouse lacks the ability to execute an assignment due to physical or
                mental impairment but The Department has the right to bring a support proceeding
                against the community spouse without such assignment; or

        c.      The eligibility site determines that the denial of eligibility would work an undue hardship
                upon the institutionalized spouse. For the purposes of this subparagraph, undue hardship
                means that an institutionalized spouse, who meets all the Medical Assistance eligibility
                criteria except for resource eligibility, has no alternative living arrangement other than the
                medical institution or Long Term Care institution.

8.100.7.N.      Treatment of the Home and Other Exempt Resources

The CSRA shall not include the value of exempt resources including the home. It is not necessary for the
home to be transferred to the community spouse. The rules regarding countable and exempt resources
can be found in the section 8.100.5. However, for Spousal Protection there is no limit to the value of
household goods and personal effects and one automobile.

8.100.7.O.      Determination of the Institutionalized Spouse’s Income and Resource Eligibility

1.      The institutionalized spouse is resource eligible for Medical Assistance when the total resources
        owned by the couple are at or below the amount of the Community Spouse Resource Allowance
        plus the Medical Assistance resource allowance for an individual of $2,000.

2.      The eligibility site shall determine whether the institutionalized spouse is income eligible for
        Medical Assistance. The institutionalized spouse shall be income eligible if his/her gross income
        is at or below the Medical Assistance income limit for recipients of long-term care. If an income
        trust is used the trust must be established before the MIA is calculated.

8.100.7.P.      Attribution of Income

During any month in which a spouse is institutionalized, the income of the community spouse shall not be
deemed available to the institutionalized spouse except as follows:

1.      If payment of income from resources is made solely in the name of either the institutionalized
        spouse or the community spouse, the income shall be considered available only to the named
        spouse.

2.      If payment of income from resources is made in the names of both the institutionalized spouse
        and the community spouse, one-half of the income shall be considered available to each spouse.

3.      If payment of income is made in the names of the institutionalized spouse or the community
        spouse, or both, and to another person or persons, the income shall be considered available to
        each spouse in proportion to the spouse’s interest.

4.      The above regulations of attribution of income are superseded if the institutionalized spouse can
        establish by a preponderance of the evidence that the ownership interests in the income are other
        than that provided in the regulations.

8.100.7.Q.      Calculating the Community Spouse’s Monthly Income Needs

1.      The community spouse's total minimum monthly needs shall be determined as follows:




                                                                                                          129
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                         10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


      a.     The current minimum monthly maintenance needs allowance (MMMNA), which is equal
             to 150% of the federal poverty level for a family of two and is adjusted in July of each
             year;

      b.     An excess shelter allowance, in cases where the community spouse's expenses for
             shelter exceed 30% of the MMMNA. The excess shelter allowance is computed by
             adding (a) and (b) together:

             i)      The community spouse’s expenses for rent or mortgage payment including
                     principal and interest, taxes and insurance, and, in the case of a condominium or
                     cooperative, any required maintenance fee, for the community spouse’s principal
                     residence; and

             ii)     The larger of the following amounts: the standard utility allowance used by
                     Colorado under U.S.C. 2014(e) of Title 7; or the community spouse’s actual,
                     verified, utility expenses. A utility allowance shall not be allowed if the utility
                     expenses are included in the rent or maintenance charge, which is paid by the
                     community spouse.

             iii)    The excess shelter allowance is the amount, if any, that exceeds 30% of the
                     MMMNA.

2.    An additional amount may be approved for the following expenses:

      a.     Medical expenses of the community spouse or dependent family member for necessary
             medical or remedial care. Each medical or remedial care expense claimed for deduction
             must be documented in a manner that describes the service, the date of the service, the
             amount of the cost incurred, and the name of the service provider. An expense may be
             deducted only if it is:

             i)      Provided by a medical practitioner licensed to furnish the care;

             ii)     Not subject to payment by any third party, including Medical Assistance and
                     Medicare;

      b.     The cost of Medicare, Long Term Care insurance, and health insurance premiums. A
             health insurance premium may be allowed in the month the premium is paid or may be
             prorated and allowed for the months the premium covers. This allowance does not
             include payments made for coverage which is:

             i)      Limited to disability or income protection coverage;

             ii)     Automobile medical payment coverage;

             iii)    Supplemental to liability insurance;

             iv)     Designed solely to provide payments on a per diem basis, daily indemnity or non-
                     expense-incurred basis; or

             v)      Credit life and/or accident and health insurance.




                                                                                                       130
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                          10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


3.     If either spouse establishes that the community spouse needs income above the level provided
       by the minimum monthly maintenance needs allowance due to exceptional circumstances, which
       result in significant financial duress, such as loss of home and possessions due to fire, flood, or
       tornado, an additional amount may be substituted for the MMMNA if established through a fair
       hearing.

4.     The total that results from adding the current MMMNA and the excess shelter allowance shall not
       exceed the current maximum MMMNA which is $2,175.00 for the year 2001 and is adjusted by
       the Health Care Financing Administration in January of each year.

8.100.7.R.    Calculating the Amount of Income to be Contributed by the Institutionalized
        Spouse for the Community Spouse's Monthly Needs

1.     The Monthly Income Allowance (MIA) is the amount of money necessary to raise the community
       spouse's income to the level of his/her monthly needs, and shall be obtained from the monthly
       income of the institutionalized spouse. For individuals who become institutionalized on or after
       February 8, 2006, all income of the institutionalized spouse that could be made available to the
       community spouse must be considered to have been made available to the community spouse
       before an MIA is allocated to the community spouse.

2.     The MIA shall be the amount by which the community spouse's minimum monthly needs, which is
       the MMMNA, exceed his/her income from sources other than the institutionalized spouse. The
       community spouse’s income shall be calculated by using the gross income less mandatory
       deduct ions for FICA and Medicare tax.

3.     If a court has entered an order against the institutionalized spouse for monthly support of the
       community spouse, the MIA shall not be less than the monthly amount ordered by the court.

4.     The eligibility site shall make adjustments to the MMMNA and/or the MIA on a monthly basis for
       any continuing change in circumstances that exceeds $50 a month. Continuing changes of less
       than $50 in a month, and any infrequent or irregular changes, shall be considered at
       redetermination.

8.100.7.S.     Increasing the Community Spouse Resource Allowance

1.     The CSRA shall be increased above the maximum amount if additional resources are needed to
       raise the community spouse's monthly income to the level of the Minimum Monthly Maintenance
       Needs Allowance (MMMNA). In making this determination the items listed below are calculated in
       the following order:

       a.      The community spouse's MMMNA;

       b.      The community spouse’s own income; and

       c.      The Monthly Income Allowance (MIA) contribution that the community spouse is eligible
               to receive from the institutionalized spouse.

       d.      If the community spouse’s own income, and the Monthly Income Allowance contribution
               from the institutionalized spouse’s income is less than the Minimum Monthly Maintenance
               Needs Allowance, additional available resources shall be shifted to the community
               spouse to bring his/her income up to the level of the MMMNA. The additional resources
               necessary to raise the community spouse’s monthly income to the level of the MMMNA
               shall be based upon the cost of a single-premium lifetime annuity with monthly payments
               equal to the difference between the MMMNA and the community spouse’s income. The
               following steps shall be followed to determine the amount of resources to be shifted:




                                                                                                         131
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                           10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


                i)      The applicant shall obtain three estimates of the cost of an annuity that would
                        generate enough income to make up the difference between the MMMNA and
                        the combined community spouse’s income as described above.

                ii)     The amount of the lowest estimate shall be used as the amount of resources to
                        increase the CSRA.

                iii)    The applicant shall not be required to purchase the annuity in order to have the
                        CSRA increased.

        e.      The CSRA shall not be increased if the institutionalized spouse refuses to make the
                monthly income allowance (MIA) available to the community spouse.

8.100.7.T.      Deductions from Monthly Income of the Institutionalized Spouse

1.      During each month after the institutionalized spouse becomes Medical Assistance eligible,
        deductions shall be made from the institutionalized spouse's monthly income in the following
        order.

        a.      A personal needs allowance or the client maintenance allowance as allowed by program
                eligibility.

        b.      A Monthly Income Allowance (MIA) for the community spouse, but only to the extent that
                income of the institutionalized spouse is actually made available to, or for the benefit of,
                the community spouse;

        c.      A family allowance for each dependent family member who lives with the community
                spouse.

                i)      The allowance for each dependent family member shall be equal to one third of
                        the amount of the MMMNA and shall be reduced by the monthly income of that
                        family member.

                ii)     Family member means dependent children (minor or adult), dependent parents
                        or dependent siblings of either spouse that are residing with the community
                        spouse and can be claimed by either the institutionalized or community spouse
                        as a dependent for federal income tax purposes.

        d.      Allowable deductions identified in section 8.100.7.V.

        e.      If the institutionalized spouse fails to make his/her income available to the community
                spouse or eligible dependent family members in accordance with these regulations, that
                income shall be applied to the cost of care for the institutionalized spouse.

        f.      No other deductions shall be allowed.

8.100.7.U.      Right to Appeal

1.      Both spouses shall be informed of the following:

        a.      The amount and method by which the eligibility site calculated the community spouse
                resource allowance (CSRA), community spouse monthly income allowance (MIA), and
                any family allowance;

        b.      The spouses' right to a fair hearing concerning these calculations;




                                                                                                         132
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                              10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


       c.      The eligibility site conclusions with respect to the spouses' ownership and availability of
               income and resources, and the spouses' right to a fair hearing concerning these
               conclusions.

2.     If either spouse establishes that the community spouse needs income above the level provided
       by the minimum monthly maintenance needs allowance due to exceptional circumstances, which
       result in significant financial duress, such as loss of home and possessions due to fire, flood, or
       tornado, an additional amount may be substituted for the MMMNA if established through a fair
       hearing.

3.     Appeals from decisions made by the eligibility site shall be governed by the provisions under
       Recipient Appeals Protocols/Process at 8.058.

8.100.7.V.     Long-Term Care Institution Recipient Income

1.     Determination of Income and Communication between the Long-Term Care institution and the
       Eligibility Site Using the AP-5615 Form for Patient Payment

       a.      Sections I, II and IV of the AP-5615 form are to be completed by the Long-Term Care
               institution for all admissions, readmissions, transfers to and from another payer source,
               including private pay and Medicare, discharges, deaths, changes in income and/or
               patient payment, medical leaves of absence and non-medical/programmatic leave in
               excess of 42 days combined per calendar year.

       b.      The initial determination of resident income for patient payment shall be made by the
               Eligibility Site. The Eligibility Site shall notify the Long-Term Care institution of current
               resident income.

       c.      On receipt of AP-5615 form, the Eligibility Site will, within five working days:

               i)      For an admission, a readmission or a transfer from/to private pay, Medicare, or
                       another payer source:

                       1)       Verify and correct, if necessary, data entered by the Long-Term Care
                                institution.

                       2)       List and/or verify the resident's monthly income adjustments and/or
                                Long-Term Care Insurance benefit payments; and compute patient
                                payment. Provide the completed AP-5615 to the Long-Term Care
                                institution.

                       3)       Correct the automated system to indicate the Long-Term Care institution
                                name and provider number and to reflect the current distribution of
                                income. Submit the AP-5615 form to the Department.

       d.      For change in patient payment with respect to changes in resident income:

               i)      Verify changes in resident income, and correct if necessary. All such corrections
                       must be initialed,

               ii)     Compute patient payment and provide the completed AP-5615 to the Long-Term
                       Care institution.

       e.      For change in patient payment with respect to the post-eligibility treatment of income, the
               Eligibility Site shall:




                                                                                                               133
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                      10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


            i)      Review the AP-5615 form for Medicare part B premium deduction allowances for
                    the first two months of admission.

            ii)     If client is already on the Medicare Buy-In program for Medicare part B, do not
                    adjust patient payment on AP-5615 form for the Medicare premium deduction. If
                    client is not on the Buy-In program, adjust AP-5615 form for the Medicare
                    premium deduction for the first two months of Long-Term Care institution
                    eligibility.

            iii)    If the client has a Medicare D premium, the Eligibility Site shall use the amount
                    as an income adjustment/deduction in the patient payment calculation and
                    complete the AP-5615 form.

      f.    For resident leave of absence:

            i)      Non-Medical/Programmatic Leave. When combined non-medical/programmatic
                    days in excess of 42 days are reported, verify adherence to the restrictions and
                    conditions of section 8.482.44.

            ii)     Medical Leave/Hospitalization. Verify that the patient payment is apportioned
                    correctly between the nursing facility and the hospital so that no Medicaid
                    payment is requested for the period. See also section 8.482.43.

            iii)    The nursing facility may wait until the end of the month to complete the AP-5615
                    form for an ongoing hospitalization.

      g.    For change in payer status:

            i)      If Medicare or insurance is a primary payer during the month, verify the nursing
                    facility’s calculation of the patient payment.

            ii)     Complete and provide the AP-5615 to the nursing facility.

      h.    For discharge or death of resident:

            i)      Verify the date of death or discharge, and verify the correct patient payment
                    including the resident's monthly income for the discharged month, and the
                    amount calculated by per diem. All corrections must be initialed.

            ii)     Note if the resident entered another Long-Term Care institution and, if so, enter
                    the name of the new Long-Term Care institution in the system.

            iii)    In the event the resident may return to the same facility, the AP-5615 form may
                    be completed at the end of the month for discharges due to hospitalization.

      i.    For discontinuation of Long-Term Care eligibility:

            i)      Initiate and send an AP-5615 form to the Long-Term Care institution within 5
                    working days of the date of determination that the client’s eligibility will be
                    discontinued. Indicate the date the discontinuation will be effective.

      j.    Failure to provide a correct and timely AP-5615 to the Long-Term Care institution may
            result in the refusal of the Department to reimburse such Long-Term Care institution care.
            The AP-5615 form is required in order for a Prior Authorization Request (PAR) to be
            issued for Long-Term Care institution claim reimbursement.




                                                                                                      134
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                          10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


      k.     General Instructions:

             i)      The AP-5615 form must be verified and a signed AP-5615 form returned to the
                     Long-Term Care institution.

             ii)     The AP-5615 form must be signed and dated by the director of the Eligibility Site
                     or by his/her designee.

             iii)    AP-5615 forms may be initiated by either the Long-Term Care institution or
                     Eligibility Site. If the Eligibility Site is aware of information requiring a change in
                     financial arrangements of a resident, and a new AP-5615 form is not forthcoming
                     from the Long-Term Care institution, the Eligibility Site may initiate the revision to
                     the AP-5615 form. In such case, one copy of the AP-5615 form showing the
                     changes will be sent to the Long-Term Care institution.

      l.     The Department may deduct excess payments from the Eligibility Site administrative
             reimbursement as stated in the Colorado Department of Human Services Finance Staff
             Manual, Volume 5 if the Eligibility Site fails to:

             i)      Perform the duties as detailed in this section; or

             ii)     Adhere to the limitations on a reduced patient payment; as detailed in section
                     8.100.7.V.4; or

             iii)    Notify the Long-Term Care institution within 5 working days of any changes in
                     resident income, provided the Long-Term Care institution is not authorized to
                     receive the resident's income; and excessive Medicaid funds are paid to the
                     Long-Term Care institution as a result of this negligence.

2.    Collection of Patient Payment

      a.     It shall be the responsibility of the Long-Term Care institution to collect from the client, or
             from the client's family, conservator or administrator, the patient payment, which is to be
             applied to the cost of client care. The Department is not responsible for any deficiency in
             patient payment accounts, due to failure of the Long-Term Care institution to collect such
             income.

      b.     If, however, the Long-Term Care institution is unable to collect such funds, through
             refusal of the resident or the resident's family, conservator, administrator or responsible
             party to release such income, the Long-Term Care institution shall immediately notify the
             Eligibility Site.

      c.     When notified by the Long-Term Care institution of the refusal of the client or the client's
             family, conservator administrator or responsible party to pay the patient payment due, the
             Eligibility Site shall immediately contact the refusing party. If, after such contact, the party
             still refuses to release such income, the action shall be deemed a failure to cooperate,
             and the Eligibility Site shall proceed to discontinue Medicaid benefits for the resident.

3.    Calculation of Patient Payment

      a.     Specific instructions for computing the patient payment amount are contained in this
             volume under The “Status of Long-Term Care institution Care” Form, AP-5615




                                                                                                         135
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                      10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


      b.    Once an applicant for Nursing Facility Medical Assistance has been determined eligible
            for Medical Assistance, the Eligibility Site shall determine the patient payment due to the
            Nursing Facility which is to be applied to the Medicaid reimbursement for the cost of care.
            That patient payment is calculated by:

            i)      Determining all applicable income of the recipient

            ii)     Deducting all applicable allowable monthly income adjustments, which include:

                    1)      Personal Needs Allowance

                    2)      If applicable, Monthly Income Allowance for the community spouse.

                    3)      If applicable, Family Dependent Allowance

                    4)      If applicable, Home Maintenance Allowance

                    5)      If applicable, Trustee/Maintenance Fees: actual fees, with a maximum of
                            $20 per month

                    6)      If applicable, Mandatory Income Tax Withheld

                    7)      Mandatory garnishments repaying Federal assistance overpayment

                    8)      Medical or remedial care expenses that are not subject to payment by a
                            third party:

                            a)      Medicare Part B Premium expenses, if applicable, are deductible
                                    only for the first and second month in the Nursing Facility.

                            b)      Medicare Part D Premium expenses, if applicable, are ongoing
                                    deductions.

                            c)      Other medical and remedial expenses covered under the
                                    Nursing Facility PETI (NF PETI) program are not deductible. NF
                                    PETI-approved expenses are allowed only for residents with a
                                    patient payment, but do not change the patient payment amount.
                                    For NF PETI, see the Section 8.482.33 in this volume “Post
                                    Eligibility Treatment of Income”.

      c.    Long-Term Care Insurance

            Long-Term Care insurance payments are not counted as income for eligibility purposes.
            However, they are income available for a patient payment. The patient payment shall
            include the client’s income after the allowable deductions and any Long-Term Care
            insurance payments for the month. In the event that the patient payment is greater than
            the cost of care, the Long-Term Care insurance payment shall be applied before the
            client’s income.

            i)      If Long-Term Care insurance is received for the month, and:

                    1)      If, after all deductions, the client has income available for a patient
                            payment, add this to the amount of the Long-Term Care insurance to
                            determine the total patient payment.




                                                                                                      136
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                     10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


                           a)      If the total amount is greater that the allowable cost of care, the
                                   Long-Term Care insurance is applied before the client’s income,
                                   or;

                           b       If after all deductions, the client does not have income available
                                   for the patient payment, only the Long-Term Care insurance
                                   payment is used.

      d.    Personal Needs Allowances

            i)     Non-Veteran related personal needs allowance

                   1)      Prior to January 1, 2015 the personal needs allowance base amount is
                           $50 per month.

                   2)      Effective January 1, 2015 the personal needs allowance base amount is
                           $75 per month and will be adjusted annually at the same rate as the
                           statewide average of the nursing facility per diem rate net of patient
                           payment pursuant to C.R.S. § 25.5-6-202(9)(b)(I). Each yearly
                           adjustment will set a new base amount.

                           a)      The first annual rate adjustment to the new $75 base amount will
                                   occur on January 1, 2015.

            ii)    Veterans-related personal needs allowance

                   Effective 07/01/91, the personal needs allowance shall be $90 per month for a
                   veteran in a Long-Term Care institution who has no spouse or dependent child
                   and who receives a non-service connected disability pension from the U.S.
                   Veterans Administration. The personal needs allowance shall also be $90 per
                   month for the widow(er) of a veteran with no dependent children.

                   1)      Public Law requires that a veteran, without a spouse or dependent child,
                           who enters a Long-Term Care institution have their veteran’s pension
                           reduced to $90 which is to be reserved for their personal needs. This
                           reduction in pension is not applicable to veteran’s who reside in a State
                           Veteran’s Nursing facility. If a veteran, who does not reside in a State
                           Veteran’s Nursing facility, receives a pension reduction of $90 he/she is
                           allowed to apply this $90 to his/her personal needs allowance. It is not
                           considered income toward the patient payment. The same regulation
                           applies to a widow of a veteran without any dependent children.

                   2)      To verify if those veterans residing in State Veteran’s Nursing facilities
                           are receiving a non-service connected pension you may request their
                           award letter from the Department of Veterans Affairs or call the
                           Department of Veterans Affairs and verify through contact. If they are
                           receiving any amount in a non-service connected pension they are
                           entitled to a $90 personal needs allowance so long as they do not have a
                           spouse or dependent child. The same regulation applies to a widow of a
                           veteran without any dependent children.

            iii)   For aged, disabled, or blind Long-Term Care institution recipients engaged in
                   income-producing activities, an additional amount of $65 per month plus one-half
                   of the remaining gross income may be retained by the individual.




                                                                                                   137
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                        10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


            iv)     Effective September 15, 1994, aged, disabled, or blind Long-Term Care
                    institution residents, HCBS or PACE recipients with mandatory withholdings from
                    earned or unearned income to cover federal state, and local taxes may have an
                    additional amount included as a deduction from the patient payment. The patient
                    payment deduction must be for a specific accounting period when the taxes are
                    owed and expected to be withheld from income or paid by the individual in the
                    accounting period. The Eligibility Site must verify that the taxes were withheld. If
                    the taxes are not paid, the Eligibility Site must establish a recovery. The
                    deduction is also applicable for any Federal pensions with mandated tax
                    withholdings from unearned income despite the individual earner being
                    institutionalized. All other pensions will discontinue the tax withholding once
                    notified that the recipient is receiving institutionalized care through Medicaid, thus
                    signifying that the withholding was not mandatory. This deduction does not apply
                    to individuals who have elected to have taxes withheld from their earnings as a
                    means to receiving a greater tax refund.

      e.    The reserve specified in section 8.100.7.V.3.d.iii. of this volume shall apply to Long-Term
            Care institution residents who are engaged in income-producing activities on a regular
            basis. Types of income-producing activities include:

            i)      work in a sheltered workshop or work activity center;

            ii)     “protected employment” which means the employer gives special privileges to
                    the individual;

            iii)    an activity that produced income in connection with a course of vocational
                    rehabilitation;

            iv)     employment training sessions;

            v)      activities within the facility such as crafts products and facility employment.

      f.    In determining the personal needs reserve amount for Long-Term Care institution
            residents engaged in income-producing activities:

            i)      The personal needs allowance is reserved from earned income only when the
                    person has insufficient unearned income to meet this need;

            ii)     In determining countable earned income of a Long-Term Care institution
                    resident, the following rules shall apply:

                    1)      $65 shall be subtracted from the gross earned income.

                    2)      The result shall be divided in half.

                    3)      The remaining income is the countable earned income and shall be
                            considered in determining the patient payment.

            iii)    When the personal needs allowance is reserved from unearned income, the
                    additional reserve is computed based on the total gross earned income.




                                                                                                      138
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                        10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


      g.    Other Deductions Reserved from Recipient's Income:

            i)     In the case of a married, long-term care recipient who is institutionalized in a
                   Long-Term Care institution and who has a spouse (and, in some cases, other
                   dependent family members) living in the community, there are “spousal
                   protection” rules which permit the contribution of the institutionalized spouse's
                   income toward their living expenses. See section 8.100.7.K.

            ii)    For a Long-Term Care institution recipient with no family at home, an amount in
                   addition to the personal needs allowance may be reserved for maintenance of
                   the recipient's home for a temporary period, not to exceed 6 months, if a
                   physician has certified that the person is likely to return to his/her home within
                   that period.

                   This additional reserve from recipient income is referred to as Home
                   Maintenance Allowance and the amount of the deduction must be based on
                   actual and verified shelter expenses such as mortgage payments, taxes, utilities
                   to prevent freeze, etc.

                   The Home Maintenance Allowance:

                   1)      Prior to July 1, 2018 shall not exceed the total of the current shelter and
                           utilities components of the applicable standard of assistance (OAP for
                           aged recipients; AND/SSI-CS or AB/SSI-CS for disabled or blind
                           recipients).

                   2)      Beginning July 1, 2018

                           a)       The Home Maintenance Allowance shall not exceed the Home
                                    Maintenance Allowance Maximum described in this section.

                                    Claimable utility costs will be limited to the lessor of the following
                                    amounts:

                                    The standard utility allowance used by Colorado under 7 U.S.C.
                                    2014(e) (2018), which is hereby incorporated by reference.

                                    The incorporation of 7 U.S.C. 2014(e) (2018) excludes later
                                    amendments to, or editions of, the referenced material. Pursuant
                                    to § 24-4-103(12.5), C.R.S., the Department maintains copies of
                                    this incorporated text in its entirety, available for public inspection
                                    during regular business hours at: Colorado Department of Health
                                    Care Policy and Financing, 1570 Grant Street, Denver CO
                                    80203. Certified copies of incorporated materials are provided at
                                    cost upon request.

                                    Or;

                                    The individual’s actual, verified, utility expenses.

                           b)       The Maximum Home Maintenance Allowance is The Individual
                                    Needs Standard minus 105% Federal Poverty Limit (FPL) for a
                                    household of 1, rounded to the nearest whole dollar, and is
                                    determined as follows:




                                                                                                       139
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                         10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


                                      (1)      The Department will calculate the Individual Needs
                                               Standard by dividing the Federal Minimum Monthly
                                               Maintenance Needs Allowance maximum by the Federal
                                               Minimum Monthly Maintenance Needs Allowance
                                               (MMMNA), described at 8.100.7.Q, which is in place on
                                               January 1st of each calendar year. The result of this
                                               division will be multiplied by 150% of FPL for a
                                               household of 1.

                                      (2)      The Home Maintenance Maximum is determined by
                                               subtracting 150% FPL for a household of 1 from the
                                               Individual Needs Standard and adding 30% of 150%
                                               FPL for a household of 1. The result will be rounded to
                                               the nearest whole dollar.

      h.     The necessity for the deduction from a recipient's income specified in section 8.100.7.V.3
             shall be fully explained in the case record. Such additional reserve amount must be
             entered on the eligibility reporting form.

      i.     As of July 1, 1988, an SSI cash recipient may continue to receive SSI benefits when
             he/she is expected to be institutionalized for three months or less. This provision is
             intended to allow temporarily institutionalized recipients to pay the necessary expenses to
             maintain the principal place of residence.

             i)      Payments made under this continued benefit provision are not considered over-
                     payments of SSI benefits if the recipient's stay is more than 90 days.

             ii)     The amount of Supplemental Security Income (SSI) benefit paid to an
                     institutionalized individual is deducted from gross income when computing the
                     patient payment.

      j.     When a nursing facility resident’s SSI is reduced due to institutionalization, the difference
             between the reduced SSI payment and the personal needs allowance amount shall be
             provided through the Adult Financial program so that the resident receives the full
             personal needs allowance.

4.    Reduction of the Patient Payment

      a.     Patient payment may be reduced only under the following conditions:

             i)      A resident's income is equal to or less than the personal needs allowance and
                     there is no long term care insurance payment, in which case the patient payment
                     is zero; or

             ii)     A resident's income is equal to or less than the sum of all allowable and
                     appropriate deductions, and there is no long term care insurance payment; or

             iii)    A resident is admitted to the Long Term Care institution from his/her home and
                     the resident's funds are committed elsewhere for that month; or

             iv)     The resident is admitted from his/her home, where his/her funds were previously
                     committed, to the hospital, and subsequently to the Long Term Care institution, in
                     the same calendar month; or




                                                                                                       140
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                           10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


              v)       The resident is discharged to his/her home, and the Eligibility Site determines
                       that the income is necessary for living expenses; or

              vi)      The resident is admitted from another Long Term Care institution or from private
                       pay within the facility and has committed the entire patient payment for the month
                       for payment of care already provided in the month of admission.

              vii)     Medicare assesses a co-insurance payment for a QMB recipient; the recipient’s
                       patient payment cannot be used for payment of Medicare co-insurance.

      b.      Patient payment may not be waived in the following instances:

              i)       Transfers between nursing facilities, except that the patient payment for the
                       receiving facility may be waived if the patient payment has already been
                       committed to the former nursing facility; or

              ii)      Discharges from nursing facility to a hospital or other medical institution when
                       Medicaid is paying for services in the medical institution; or

              iii)     Changes from private pay within the facility and the patient payment is not
                       already committed for care provided under private pay status; or

              iv)      The death of the resident.

      c.      The Eligibility Site shall verify and approve partial month patient payments due to
              transfers, discharges or death when calculated by the nursing facility based upon the
              nursing facility’s per diem rate.

      d.      The amount of SSI benefits received by a person who is institutionalized is not
              considered when calculating patient payment.

5.    Responsibilities of the Eligibility Site Regarding the Personal Needs Fund

      a.      It shall be the responsibility of the Eligibility Site to explain to the resident the various
              options for handling the personal needs monies, as well as the resident's rights to such
              funds. The resident has the option to allow the Long Term Care institution to hold such
              funds in trust.

      b.      It shall be the responsibility of the Eligibility Site to assure that the Long Term Care
              institution properly transfers or disposes of the resident's personal needs funds within 30
              days of discharge from the Long Term Care institution, or transfer to another Long Term
              Care institution.

      c.      The Eligibility Site shall notify the State Department if they become aware that a Long
              Term Care institution has retained personal needs funds more than 30 days after the
              death of a resident.

6.    For rules regarding post eligibility treatment of income, see the section in this volume titled “Post
      Eligibility Treatment of Income”




                                                                                                          141
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                          10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board



8.125     PROVIDER SCREENING

8.125.1         DEFINITIONS.

Managed Care Entity is defined at 42 CFR § 455.101.

Ownership interest is defined at 42 CFR § 455.101.

Person with an ownership or control interest is defined at 42 CFR § 455.101.

Enrollment is defined as the process by which an individual or entity not currently enrolled as a Colorado
Medicaid provider submits a provider application, undergoes any applicable screening, pays an
application fee, as appropriate for the provider type, and is approved by the Department for participation
in the Medicaid program. Entities that have never previously enrolled as Medicaid providers or whose
enrollment was previously terminated and are not currently enrolled are required to enroll. The date of
enrollment shall be considered the date that is communicated to the provider in communication from the
Department or its fiscal agent verifying the provider’s enrollment in Medicaid.

Revalidation is defined as the process by which an individual or entity actively enrolled as a Colorado
Medicaid provider resubmits a provider application, undergoes a state-defined screening process, pays
an application fee, as appropriate for the provider type, and is approved by the Department to continue
participation in the Medicaid program.

Disclosing Entity and Other Disclosing Entity are defined at 42 CFR § 455.101.

8.125.2         PROVIDERS DESIGNATED AS LIMITED CATEGORICAL RISK AND NEW PROVIDER
TYPES

8.125.2.A.       Except as provided for in Section 8.125.2.B, provider types not designated as moderate
        or high categorical risk at Sections 8.125.3 or 8.125.4 shall be considered limited risk.

8.125.2.B.     The risk category for each provider type designated by the Centers for Medicare and
        Medicaid Services (CMS) shall be the risk category for purposes of this rule regardless of
        whether a provider type may be listed in Sections 8.125.3 or 8.125.4.

8.125.3         PROVIDERS DESIGNATED AS MODERATE CATEGORICAL RISK

8.125.3.A.      Emergency Transportation including ambulance service suppliers

8.125.3.B.     Enrolling Opioid Treatment Provider that has been fully and continuously certified by
        Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA) since October 23, 2018,
        and revalidating Opioid Treatment Providers.

8.125.3.C.      Community Mental Health Center

8.125.3.D.      Independent Laboratory

8.125.3.E.      Comprehensive Outpatient Rehabilitation Facility

8.125.3.F.      Comprehensive Safety Net Provider

8.125.3.G.      Physical Therapists, both individuals and group practices

8.125.3.H.      X-Ray Facilities




                                                                                                       142
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                       10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


8.125.3.I.      Revalidating Doulas

8.125.3.J.      Revalidating Home Health agencies

8.125.3.K.      Revalidating Hospice

8.125.3.L.      Revalidating Durable Medical equipment suppliers, including revalidating pharmacies that
        supply Durable Medical Equipment

8.125.3.M.      Revalidating Lactation Consultant

8.125.3.N.      Revalidating Lactation Counselor or Educator

8.124.3.O       Revalidating Lactation / Doula Professional Group

8.125.3.P.      Revalidating Personal Care Agencies under the state plan

8.125.3.Q.      Revalidating Skilled Nursing Facilities

8.125.3.R.      Providers of the following services for Home and Community-Based Services (HCBS)
        waiver members:

        1.      Acupuncture

        2.      Alternative Care Facility

        3.      Adult Day Services

        4.      Assistive Technology, if the provider is revalidating

        5.      Behavioral Programing

        6.      Behavioral Services

        7.      Benefits Planning

        8.      Children’s Habilitation Residential Program (CHRP)

        9.      Chiropractic

        10.     Community Connector

        11.     Community Mental Health Services

        12.     Complementary and Integrative Health

        13.     Day Habilitation

        14.     Day Treatment

        15.     Expressive Therapy

        16.     Home Delivered Meals

        17.     Home Modifications/Adaptations/Accessibility




                                                                                                    143
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                      10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


       18.   Independent Living Skills Training

       19.   In-Home Support Services, if the provider is revalidating

       20.   Life Skills Training

       21.   Massage Therapy

       22.   Mental Health Transitional Living Homes

       23.   Mentorship

       24.   Non-Medical Transportation

       25.   Palliative/Supportive Care

       26.   Peer Mentorship

       27.   Personal Care/Homemaker Services, if the provider is revalidating

       28.   Personal Emergency Response System/Medication Reminder/Electronic Monitoring

       29.   Pre-Tenancy Support Money Follows the Person (MFP)

       30.   Prevocational Services

       31.   Professional Services

       32.   Remote Supports

       33.   Residential Habilitation Services

       34.   Respite

       35.   Specialized Medical Equipment and Supplies, if the provider is revalidating

       36.   Substance Abuse Counseling

       37.   Supported Employment

       38.   Supported Living Program

       39.   Therapy and Counseling

       40.   Transition Setup

       41.   Transitional Living Program

       42.   Youth Day Services

8.125.3.S.   Medicare Only Providers

       1.    Independent Diagnostic Testing Facility

       2.    Revalidating Medicare Diabetes Prevention Program Supplier




                                                                                                  144
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                         10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


          3.    Newly enrolling Opioid Treatment Program that has been fully and continuously certified
                by Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA) since
                October 24, 2018.

          4.    Revalidating Opioid Treatment Program

8.125.4         PROVIDERS DESIGNATED AS HIGH CATEGORICAL RISK

8.125.4.A.      Enrolling Durable Medical Equipment (DME) Suppliers

8.125.4.B.      Enrolling Doulas

8.125.4.C.      Enrolling Home Health Agencies

8.125.4.D.      Enrolling Hospices

8.125.4.E.      Enrolling Lactation Consultant

8.125.4.F.      Enrolling Lactation Counselor or Educator

8.125.4.G       Enrolling Lactation / Doula Professional Group

8.125.4.H.     Enrolling Opioid Treatment Provider that has not been fully and continuously certified by
        Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA) since October 23, 2018.

8.125.4.I.      Enrolling Personal Care Agencies providing services under the state plan

8.125.4.J.      Enrolling Skilled Nursing Facilities

8.125.4.K.     Enrolling providers of the following services for Home and Community-Based Services
        (HCBS) waiver members:

          1.    Assistive Technology

          2.    Personal Care/Homemaker Services

          3.    Specialized Medical Equipment and Supplies

          4.    In-Home Support Services

8.125.4.L.      Non-Emergent Medical Transportation

8.125.4.M.      Medicare Only Providers

          1.    Enrolling Medicare Diabetes Prevention Program Supplier

          2.    Enrolling Opioid Treatment Program that has not been fully and continuously certified by
                Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA) since October
                24, 2018.

8.125.4.N.      Enrolling and revalidating providers for which the Department has suspended payments
        during an investigation of a credible allegation of fraud, for the duration of the suspension of
        payments.




                                                                                                      145
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                          10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


8.125.4.O.       Enrolling and revalidating providers which have a delinquent debt owed to the State
        arising out of Medicare, Colorado Medical Assistance or other programs administered by the
        Department, not including providers which are current under a settlement or repayment
        agreement with the State.

8.125.4.P.       Providers that were excluded by the United States Department of Health and Human
        Services (HHS) Office of Inspector General or had their provider agreement terminated for cause
        by the Department, its contractors or agents or another State's Medicaid program at any time
        within the previous 10 years.

8.125.4.Q.      Providers applying for enrollment within six (6) months from the time that the Department
        or the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) lifts a temporary enrollment
        moratorium on the provider’s enrollment type.

8.125.5         PROVIDERS WITH MULTIPLE RISK LEVELS

8.125.5.A        Providers shall be screened at the highest applicable risk level for which a provider meets
        the criteria. Providers shall only pay one application fee per location.

8.125.6         PROVIDERS WITH MULTIPLE LOCATIONS

8.125.6.A.      Providers must enroll separately each location from which they provide services. Only
        claims for services provided at locations that are enrolled are eligible for reimbursement.

8.125.6.B.      Each provider site will be screened separately and must pay a separate application fee.
        Providers shall only pay one application fee per location.

8.125.7         ENROLLMENT AND SCREENING OF PROVIDERS

8.125.7.A.      All enrolling and revalidating providers must be screened in accordance with
        requirements appropriate to their categorical risk level.

8.125.7.B.      Notwithstanding any other provision of the Colorado Code of Regulations, providers who
        provide services to Medicaid members as part of a managed care entity’s provider network who
        would have to enroll in order to participate in fee-for-service Medicaid must enroll with the
        Department and be screened as Medicaid providers.

8.125.7.C.     Nothing in Section 8.125.7.B shall require a provider who provides services to Medicaid
        members as part of a managed care entity’s provider network to participate in fee-for-service
        Medicaid.

8.125.7.D.       All physicians or other professionals who order, prescribe, or refer services or items for
        Medicaid members, whether as part of fee-for-service Medicaid or as part of a managed care
        entity’s provider network under either the state plan, the Children’s Health Insurance Program, or
        a waiver, must be enrolled in order for claims submitted for those ordered, referred, or prescribed
        services or items to be reimbursed or accepted for the calculation of managed care rates by the
        Department.

8.125.7.E.      The Department may exempt certain providers from all or part of the screening
        requirements when certain providers have been screened, approved and enrolled or revalidated:

          1.    By Medicare, or




                                                                                                        146
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                             10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


          2.     By another state’s Medicaid program within the last 5 years, provided the Department
                 has determined that the state in which the provider was enrolled or revalidated has
                 screening requirements at least as comprehensive and stringent as those for Colorado
                 Medicaid.

8.125.7.F.        The Department may deny a Provider’s enrollment or terminate a Provider agreement for
        failure to comply with screening requirements.

8.125.7.G.      The Department may terminate a Provider agreement or deny the Provider's enrollment if
        the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) or the Department determines that the
        provider has falsified any information provided on the application or cannot verify the identity of
        any provider applicant.

8.125.8          NATIONAL PROVIDER IDENTIFIER FOR ORDERING, PRESCRIBING, REFERRING

8.125.8.A.       As a condition of reimbursement, any claim submitted for a service or item that was
        ordered, referred, or prescribed for a Medicaid member must contain the National Provider
        Identifier (NPI) of the ordering, prescribing or referring physician or other professional.

8.125.9          VERIFICATION OF PROVIDER LICENSES

8.125.9.A.      If a provider is required to possess a license or certification in order to provide services or
        supplies in the State of Colorado, then that provider must be so licensed as a condition of
        enrollment as a Medicaid provider.

8.125.9.B.     Required licenses must be kept current and active without any current limitations
        throughout the term of the agreement.

8.125.10         REVALIDATION

8.125.10.A.    Actively enrolled providers must complete all requirements for revalidation at least every
       5 years as established by the Department, or upon request from the Department for an off-cycle
       review.

8.125.10.B.       The date of revalidation shall be considered the date that the provider’s application was
       initially approved plus 5 years, or by an off-cycle request from the Department.

8.125.10.C.     If a provider fails to comply with any requirement for revalidation by the deadlines
       established by Sections 8.125.10.A. or 8.125.10.B., the provider agreement may be terminated.
       In the event that the provider agreement is terminated pursuant to this section, any claims for
       dates of service submitted after deadlines established by Sections 8.125.10.A. or 8.125.10.B., are
       not reimbursable beginning on the day after the date indicated by Section 8.125.10.B.

8.125.11         SITE VISITS

8.125.11.A.    All providers designated as “moderate” or “high” categorical risks to the Medicaid
       program must consent to and pass a site visit before they may be enrolled or re-validated as
       Colorado Medicaid providers. The purpose of the site visit is to verify that the information
       submitted to the state department is accurate and to determine compliance with federal and state
       enrollment requirements.




                                                                                                           147
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                              10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


8.125.11.B.      All enrolled providers who are designated as “moderate” or “high” categorical risks must
       consent to and pass an additional site visit after enrollment or revalidation. The purpose of the
       site visit is to verify that the information submitted to the state department is accurate and to
       determine compliance with federal and state enrollment requirements. Post-enrollment or post-
       revalidation site visits may occur anytime during the five-year period after enrollment or
       revalidation.

8.125.11.C.    All providers enrolled in the Colorado Medicaid program must permit the Centers for
       Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS), its agents, its designated contractors, the State Attorney
       General’s Medicaid Fraud Control Unit or the Department to conduct unannounced on-site
       inspections of any and all provider locations

8.125.11.D.      All site visits shall verify the following information:

        1.       Basic Information including business name, address, phone number, on-site contact
                 person, National Provider Identifier (NPI) number and Employer Identification Number,
                 business license, provider type, owner’s name(s), and owner’s interest in other medical
                 businesses.

        2.       Location including appropriate signage, utilities that are turned on, the presence of
                 furniture and applicable equipment, and disability access where applicable and where
                 clients are served at the business location.

        3.       Employees with relevant training, designated employees who are trained to handle
                 Medicaid billing, where applicable, and resources the provider uses to train employees in
                 Medicaid billing where applicable.

        4.       Appropriate inventory necessary to provide services for specific provider type.

        5.       Other information as designated by the Department.

8.125.11.E.     The Department shall give the provider a report detailing the discrepancies or
       insufficiencies in the information disclosed by the provider and the criteria the provider failed to
       meet during the site visit.

8.125.11.F.    Providers that are found in full compliance shall be recommended for approval of
       enrollment or revalidation, subject to other enrollment or revalidation requirements.

8.125.11.G.     Providers who meet the vast majority of criteria in 8.125.11.D but have small number of
       minor discrepancies or insufficiencies shall have 60 days from the date of the issuance of the
       report in 8.125.11.E to submit documentation to the Department attesting that the provider has
       corrected the issues identified during the site visit.

        1.       If the provider submits attestation within the 60 day timeframe and has met requirements,
                 then the provider shall be recommended for enrollment or revalidation, subject to the
                 verification of other enrollment or revalidation requirements.

        2.       If the provider fails to submit the attestation in 8.125.11.G.1 within the 60 day deadline,
                 the Department may deny the provider’s application for enrollment or revalidation.

        3.       If the provider submits an attestation within 60 days indicating that the provider is not fully
                 compliant with criteria in 8.125.11.D, then the Department may,

                 a.       For existing providers, suspend the provider, until the provider demonstrates
                          compliance in a subsequent site visit, conducted at the provider’s expense; or




                                                                                                            148
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                            10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


                b.       For new providers, deny the application and require the provider to restart the
                         enrollment process.

8.125.11.H.     When site visits reveal major discrepancies or insufficiencies in the information provided
       in the enrollment application or a majority of the criteria described in 8.125.11.D are not met, the
       Department shall allow for an additional site visit for the provider.

        1.      Additional site visits shall be conducted at the provider’s expense.

        2.      The provider shall have 14 days from the date of the issuance of the report listed in
                8.125.11.E above to request an additional site visit.

        3.      The Department shall deny or terminate enrollment or revalidation of any provider subject
                to 8.125.11.G who does not request an additional site visit within 14 days.

        4.      If the Department determines that a provider is not in full compliance upon the additional
                site visit:

                a.       for a revalidating provider, the Department shall immediately suspend the
                         provider until a subsequent site visit demonstrates provider is in compliance.

                b.       for an enrolling provider, deny the application and require the provider to restart
                         the enrollment process.

8.125.11.I.    The Department shall deny or terminate enrollment or revalidation of any provider who
       refuses to allow a site visit, unless the Department determines the provider or the provider’s staff
       refused the on-site inspection in error. The provider must provide credible evidence to the
       Department that it refused the on-site inspection in error within in 7 days of the date of the
       issuance of the report in 8.125.11.E. Any provider who does not provide credible evidence to the
       Department that it refused the on-site inspection in error shall be denied or terminated from
       enrollment or revalidation.

8.125.11.J.     The Department shall deny an application or terminate a provider’s enrollment when an
       on-site inspection provides credible evidence that the provider has committed Medicaid fraud.

8.125.11.K.     The Department shall refer providers in 8.125.11.J to the State Attorney General.

8.125.12        CRIMINAL BACKGROUND CHECKS AND FINGERPRINTING

8.125.12.A.    As a condition of provider enrollment, any person with an ownership or control interest in
       a provider designated as “high” categorical risk to the Medicaid program, must consent to criminal
       background checks and submit a set of fingerprints, in a form and manner to be determined by
       the Department.

8.125.12.B.   Any provider, and any person with an ownership or control interest in the provider, must
       consent to criminal background checks and submit a set of fingerprints, in a form and manner
       designated by the Department, within 30 days upon request from the Centers for Medicare and
       Medicaid Services (CMS), the Department, the Department’s agents, or the Department’s
       designated contractors.

8.125.13        APPLICATION FEE

8.125.13.A.     Except when exempted in Sections 8.125.13.C and 8.125.13.D, enrolling and re-
       validating providers must submit an application fee or a formal request for a hardship exemption
       with their application.




                                                                                                           149
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                            10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


8.125.13.B.  The amount of the application fee is the amount calculated by the Centers for Medicare
       and Medicaid Services (CMS) in accordance with 42 CFR § 424.514(d).

8.125.13.C.     Application fees shall apply to all providers except:

        1.      Individual practitioners

        2.      Providers who have enrolled or re-validated in Medicare and paid an application fee

        3.      Providers who have enrolled or re-validated in another State’s Medicaid or Children’s
                Health Insurance Program and paid an application fee provided that the Department has
                determined that the screening procedures in the state in which the provider is enrolled
                are at least as comprehensive and stringent as the screening procedures required for
                enrollment in Colorado Medicaid.

8.125.13.D.    The Department may exempt a provider, or group of providers, from paying the
       applicable application fee, through a hardship exemption request or categorical fee waiver, if:

        1.      The Department determines that requiring a provider to pay an application fee would
                negatively impact access to care for Medicaid clients, and

        2.      The Department receives approval from the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services
                to exempt the application fee.

8.125.13.E.    A provider may not be enrolled or revalidated unless the provider has either paid any
       applicable application fee or obtained an exemption described at Section 8.125.13.D.

8.125.13.F.     The application fee is non-refundable, except if submitted with one of the following:

        1.      A request for hardship exemption described at Section 8.125.13.D, that is subsequently
                approved;

        2.      An application that is rejected prior to initiation of screening processes;

        3.      An application that is subsequently denied as a result of the imposition of a temporary
                moratorium as described at Section 8.125.14.

8.125.14        TEMPORARY MORATORIA

8.125.14.A.     In consultation with the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) and the
       United States Department of Health and Human Services (HHS), the Department may impose
       temporary moratoria on the enrollment of new providers or provider types, or impose numerical
       caps or other limits on providers that the Department and the Secretary of HHS identify as being
       a significant potential risk for fraud, waste, or abuse, unless the Department determines that such
       an action would adversely impact Medicaid members’ access to medical assistance.

8.125.14.B.    Before imposing any moratoria, caps, or other limits on provider enrollment, the
       Department shall notify the Secretary of the United States Department of Health and Human
       Services (HHS) in writing and include all details of the moratoria.

8.125.14.C.    The Department shall obtain the Secretary of the United States Department of Health and
       Human Services (HHS) concurrence with imposition of the moratoria, caps, or other limits on
       provider enrollment, before such limits shall take effect.




                                                                                                          150
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                            10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


8.125.15   DISCLOSURES BY MEDICAID PROVIDERS, MANAGED CARE ENTITIES,
MEDICARE PROVIDERS AND FISCAL AGENTS

8.125.15.A.     All providers, disclosing entities, fiscal agents, and managed care entities must provide
       the following federally required disclosures to the Department:

        1.      The name and address of any entity (individual or corporation) with an ownership or
                control interest in the disclosing entity, fiscal agent, or managed care entity having direct
                or indirect ownership of 5 percent or more. The address for corporate entities must
                include, as applicable, primary business address, every business location, and P.O. Box
                address.

        2.      For individuals: Date of birth and Social Security number

        3.      For business entities: Other tax identification number for any entity with an ownership or
                control interest in the disclosing entity (or fiscal agent or managed care entity) or in any
                subcontractor in which the disclosing entity (or fiscal agent or managed care entity) has a
                5 percent or more interest.

        4.      Whether the entity (individual or corporation) with an ownership or control interest in the
                disclosing entity (or fiscal agent or managed care entity) is related to another person with
                ownership or control interest in the disclosing entity as a spouse, parent, child, or sibling;
                or whether the entity (individual or corporation) with an ownership or control interest in
                any subcontractor in which the disclosing entity (or fiscal agent or managed care entity)
                has a 5 percent or more interest is related to another person with ownership or control
                interest in the disclosing entity as a spouse, parent, child, or sibling.

        5.      The name of any other disclosing entity (or fiscal agent or managed care entity) in which
                an owner of the disclosing entity (or fiscal agent or managed care entity) has an
                ownership or control interest.

        6.      The name, address, date of birth, and Social Security Number of any managing
                employee of the disclosing entity (or fiscal agent or managed care entity).

        7.      The identity of any person who has an ownership or control interest in the provider, or is
                an agent or managing employee of the provider who has been convicted of a criminal
                offense related to that person’s involvement in any program under Medicare, Medicaid,
                Children’s Health Insurance Program or the Title XX services since the inception of these
                programs.

        8.      Full and complete information about the ownership of any subcontractor with whom the
                provider has had business transactions totaling more than $25,000 during the 12 month
                period ending on the date of the request; and any significant business transactions
                between the provider and any wholly owned supplier, or between the provider and any
                subcontractor, during the 5-year period ending on the date of the request.

8.125.15.B.     Disclosures from any provider or disclosing entity are due at any of the following times:

        1.      Upon the provider or disclosing entity submitting the provider application.

        2.      Upon the provider or disclosing entity executing the provider agreement.

        3.      Upon request of the Department during revalidation.

        4.      Within 35 days after any change in ownership of the disclosing entity.




                                                                                                          151
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                            10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


8.125.15.C.     Disclosures from fiscal agents are due at any of the following times:

        1.      Upon the fiscal agent submitting its proposal in accordance with the State's procurement
                process.

        2.      Upon the fiscal agent executing a contract with the State.

        3.      Upon renewal or extension of the contract.

        4.      Within 35 days after any change in ownership of the fiscal agent.

8.125.15.D.     Disclosures from managed care entities are due at any of the following times:

        1.      Upon the managed care entity submitting its proposal in accordance with the State's
                procurement process.

        2.      Upon the managed care entity executing a contract with the State.

        3.      Upon renewal or extension of the contract.

        4.      Within 35 days after any change in ownership of the managed care entity.

8.125.15.E.    The Department will not reimburse any claim from any provider or entity or make any
       payment to an entity that fails to disclose ownership or control information as required by 42 CFR
       § 455.104. The Department will not reimburse any claim from any provider or entity or make any
       payment to an entity that fails to disclose information related to business transactions as required
       by 42 CFR § 455.105 beginning on the day following the date the information was due and
       ending on the day before the date on which the information was supplied. Any payment made to
       a provider or entity that is not reimbursable in accordance with this section shall be considered an
       overpayment.

8.125.15.F.    The Department may terminate the agreement of any provider or entity or deny
       enrollment of any provider that fails to disclose information when requested or required by 42
       CFR § 455.100-106.

8.126   COLORADO NATIONAL PROVIDER IDENTIFIER (NPI) RULE

8.126.1 Definitions

A.      Billing Provider Field means the data field on a Claim that reflects the Health Care Provider to
        which the payer issues payment.

B.      Campus means the physical area immediately adjacent to the Hospital’s main buildings, other
        areas and structures that are not strictly contiguous to the main buildings but are located within
        250 yards of the main buildings, and any other areas determined on an individual case basis by
        the Centers of Medicare and Medicaid Services to be part of the provider's campus.

C.      Claim means a request for payment for the delivery of medical care, services, or goods
        authorized under the Medical Assistance Program, submitted to the Department through its fiscal
        agent by a Health Care Provider. Claim includes the transmission of encounter information for the
        purpose of reporting the delivery of medical care, services, or goods.

D.      Health Care Provider means any person or organization that furnishes, bills for, or is paid for
        medical care, services, or goods to one or more Medical Assistance Program members.




                                                                                                           152
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                          10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


      1.      A Health Care Provider includes an Organization Health Care Provider, Subpart of an
              Organization Health Care Provider, Off Campus Location, and a Site of an Organization
              Health Care Provider.

      2.      Unless specified otherwise in Subsection 8.126.1, a Health Care Provider may include a
              Health Care Provider located outside the state of Colorado (out-of-state provider) that is
              licensed and/or certified pursuant to their state laws.

E.    Hospital means an Organization Health Care Provider that is enrolled in the Medical Assistance
      Program under the Provider Type of “Hospital - General” as defined in this Subsection 8.126.1.

F.    Medical Assistance Program means the programs authorized under Articles 4, 5, 6, 8, and 10 of
      Title 25.5.

G.    National Provider Identifier (NPI) means the standard, unique health identifier for Health Care
      Providers or Organization Health Care Providers that is used by the National Plan and Provider
      Enumeration System (NPPES) in accordance with 45 C.F.R. pt. 162.

H.    Off-Campus Location means a facility that:

      1.      Has operations that are directly or indirectly owned or controlled by, in whole or in part, or
              affiliated with, a Hospital, regardless of whether the operations are under the same
              governing body as the Hospital;

      2.      Is not on the Hospital’s Campus;

      3.      Provides services that are organizationally and functionally integrated with the Hospital;

      4.      Is an outpatient facility providing preventive, diagnostic, treatment, or emergency
              services; and

      5.      Is identified on the Hospital’s State License Addendum issued by the Colorado
              Department of Public Health and Environment or, for Hospitals licensed outside of
              Colorado, documentation demonstrating direct or indirect ownership or control of the Off-
              Campus Location.

I.    Organization Health Care Provider means a Health Care Provider that is not an individual.

J.    Provider Type means a classification of Health Care Provider or Organization Health Care
      Provider to which the payer issues payment for services provided to individuals enrolled in the
      Medical Assistance Program, according to the Provider Type license, accreditation, certification,
      and/or service provided. The Provider Types recognized by the Department are as follows:

      1.      Administrative Services Organization (ASO) is an entity that has entered into a valid,
              active contract to provide ASO services with the Colorado Department of Health Care
              Policy and Financing.

      2.      Adult Mental Health Residential means a facility licensed as a Behavioral Health Entity
              (BHE) by the Behavioral Health Administration (BHA) with an Adult Mental Health
              Transitional Living, Level 2 sub-endorsement.

      3.      Ambulatory Surgical Center (ASC) means a health care entity that is:

              a.      Licensed by the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment as an
                      Ambulatory Surgical Center; and




                                                                                                        153
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                       10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


            b.      Certified by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services to participate in the
                    Medicare program as an Ambulatory Surgical Center.

      4.    Audiologist means an individual licensed as an audiologist by the Division of Professions
            and Occupations within the Colorado Department of Regulatory Agencies.

      5.    Behavioral Health Crisis Line means services provided by a call center that has proof of
            Crisis Line contract(s) with the Behavioral Health Administration (BHA).

      6.    Behavioral Health Crisis Services means an agency that is licensed by the Behavioral
            Health Administration (BHA) to provide crisis services with at least one affiliated licensed
            practitioner.

      7.    Behavioral Health Group means any behavioral health group practice enrolled in the
            Colorado Medical Assistance Program that has at least one affiliated licensed
            practitioner.

      8.    Behavioral Health Secure Transportation means services provided by an agency that is
            licensed by a Board of County Commissioners license for secure transportation services
            for each county of operation and has a Board of County Commissioners vehicle permit
            for each vehicle.

      9.    Behavioral Therapy Clinic means any group practice that has at least one affiliated
            Behavioral Therapy Individual. The affiliated Behavioral Therapy Individual must be
            enrolled in the Colorado Medical Assistance Program.

      10.   Behavioral Therapy Individual means an individual that:

            a.      Is nationally certified as a Board-Certified Behavioral Analyst (BCBA); or

            b.      Meets one of the following:

                    (1)     Has a doctoral degree with a specialty in psychiatry, medicine, or clinical
                            psychology and is actively licensed by the State Board of Examiners;
                            and has completed 400 hours of training; and/or has direct supervised
                            experience in behavioral therapies that are consistent with best practice
                            and research on effectiveness for people with autism or other
                            developmental disabilities; or

                    (2)     Has a doctoral degree in one of the behavioral or health sciences; and
                            has completed 800 hours of specific training; and/or has experience in
                            behavioral therapies that are consistent with best practice and research
                            on effectiveness for people with autism or other developmental
                            disabilities; or

                    (3)     Is nationally certified as a Board-Certified Behavioral Analyst (BCBA); or




                                                                                                     154
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                      10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


                    (4)     Has a master’s degree or higher in behavioral or health sciences; and is
                            a licensed teacher with an endorsement of school psychologist; or is a
                            licensed teacher with an endorsement of special education or early
                            childhood special education; or is credentialed as a related services
                            provider (Physical Therapist, Occupational Therapist, or Speech
                            Therapist); and has completed 1,000 hours of direct supervised training
                            or has experience in behavioral therapies that are consistent with best
                            practice and research on effectiveness for people with autism or other
                            developmental disabilities.

      11.   Birthing Center means a health care entity licensed as a Birth Center by the Colorado
            Department of Public Health and Environment. Out-of-state providers are not eligible for
            enrollment.

      12.   Case Management Agency (CMA) means a public or private not-for-profit or for-profit
            agency that meets all applicable state and federal requirements and is certified by the
            Department to provide case management services for Home and Community Based
            Services waivers.

      13.   Certified Midwife (CM) means an individual who is:

            a.      Licensed as a certified midwife by the State Board of Nursing within the Colorado
                    Department of Regulatory Agencies; and

            b.      Included within the advanced practice registry as a Certified Midwife (CM) with
                    certification from the American Midwifery Certification Board (AMCB) and a
                    graduate-level education program accredited by the Accreditation Commission
                    for Midwifery Education (ACME).

      14.   Certified Registered Nurse Anesthetist (CRNA) means an individual who is:

            a.      Licensed as a registered nurse by the State Board of Nursing within the Colorado
                    Department of Regulatory Agencies; and

            b.      Included within the advanced practice registry as a Certified Registered Nurse
                    Anesthetist (CRNA).

      15.   Chiropractor-Qualified Medicare Beneficiary (Chiropractor-QMB) means Chiropractors
            who are certified as a Qualified Medicare Beneficiary (QMB) Benefits Only providers
            through the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services and participate as providers in
            the QMB Program.

      16.   Chiropractor means an individual licensed as a chiropractor by the Board of Chiropractic
            Examiners within the Colorado Department of Regulatory Agencies.

      17.   Clinic - Dental means any group practice that has at least one affiliated, licensed dentist
            or dental hygienist.

            a.      The affiliated dentist or dental hygienist must be enrolled in the Colorado Medical
                    Assistance Program; and




                                                                                                      155
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                        10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


            b.      A dental practice or clinic must be owned by a licensed dentist except if the
                    dental practice or clinic is a non-profit organization defined as a community
                    health center (also known as a Federally Qualified Health Center or FQHC) or
                    having 50% or more patients determined as low income, or a political subdivision
                    (i.e. city, county, state, etc.); and

            c.      A dental hygiene practice or clinic must be owned by a licensed dentist or
                    licensed dental hygienist except if the dental hygiene practice or clinic is a non-
                    profit organization defined as a community health center (also known as a
                    Federally Qualified Health Center or FQHC) or having 50% or more patients
                    determined as low income, or a political subdivision (i.e. city, county, state, etc.)

      18.   Clinic - Practitioner means any group practice that has at least one affiliated, licensed
            physician, osteopath, optometrist, or podiatrist. The affiliated practitioner must be enrolled
            in the Colorado Medical Assistance Program.

      19.   Community Clinic means a health care entity that is:

            a.      Licensed as a Community Clinic or Freestanding Emergency Department (FSED)
                    by the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment;

            b.      Certified by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services to participate in the
                    Medicare program; and

            c.      Owned by a Medicare participating hospital.

      20.   Community Mental Health Center (CMHC) means an entity licensed by the Behavioral
            Health Administration (BHA) as a Behavioral Health Entity (BHE) that has program
            approval to operate as a CMHC from the BHA.

            a.      If the Community Mental Health Center (CMHC) delivers substance use disorder
                    services, it shall have an endorsement on its Behavioral Health Entity (BHE)
                    license from the Behavioral Health Administration (BHA) for those services.

      21.   Community Support Services Provider means an agency that provides community
            support services and has at least one affiliated licensed practitioner enrolled in the
            Colorado Medical Assistance Program.

            a.      Any agency providing peer services must be licensed by the Behavioral Health
                    Administration (BHA) as a Recovery Support Services Organization.

            b.      Any agency that provides supportive housing must have a Colorado Department
                    of Local Affairs (DOLA) Division of Housing (DOH) Memorandum with
                    certification number and approval as a Supportive Housing Provider.

      22.   Comprehensive Safety Net Provider means an agency that is licensed by the Behavioral
            Health Administration (BHA) as a Behavioral Health Entity and has a BHA approval letter
            as a Comprehensive Provider.

      23.   Dental Hygienist means an individual who is licensed as a Dental Hygienist by the
            Colorado Dental Board within the Colorado Department of Regulatory Agencies.




                                                                                                       156
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                        10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


      24.   Dental Therapist means an individual licensed pursuant to § 12-220-407.2, C.R.S. to
            carry out all the duties of a dental hygienist and in collaboration with a licensed dentist to
            provide direct restorations in primary and permanent teeth, extraction of primary teeth
            and periodontally diseased permanent teeth, perform brush biopsies, place temporary
            and preformed crowns, repair defective prosthetics, reimplant and stabilize teeth, remove
            sutures, dispense and administer nonnarcotic analgesics, anti-inflammatories, and
            antibiotics.

      25.   Dentist means an individual who is licensed as a Dentist by the Colorado Dental Board
            within the Colorado Department of Regulatory Agencies.

      26.   Developmental Evaluation Clinic: A clinic approved by the Colorado Department of Public
            Health and Environment to diagnose and evaluate a child's development in various
            areas, such as cognitive, motor, language, social-emotional, and adaptive skills.

      27.   Dialysis Treatment Clinic [Formerly Known as Dialysis Center] means a health care entity
            that is:

            a.      Licensed as a Dialysis Treatment Clinic pursuant to § 25-3-101, C.R.S; and

            b.      Certified by Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services to participate in the
                    Medicare program as an End-Stage Renal Dialysis Facility (ESRD).

      28.   Direct Entry or Certified Professional Midwife means an individual who is:

            a.      Registered/Licensed as either a direct-entry midwife (DEM) or certified
                    profession midwife (CPM) by the Colorado Department of Regulatory Agencies,
                    pursuant to §§ 12-225-101-109, C.R.S; and

            b.      Includes being overseen by the Director of the Division of Professions and
                    Occupations in the Department of Regulatory Agencies; and for
                    registration/licensing and approval by the Director;

            c.      Certified Professional Midwives (CPM) are accredited by the Midwifery Education
                    Accreditation Council (MEAC) following completion of an accredited education
                    program in midwifery; or,

            d.      Direct-Entry Midwives/Certified Professional Midwives (DEM/CPM) may utilize
                    apprenticeship programs, followed by their skills, knowledge and education
                    (identified by the National American Registry of Midwives (NARM)) being verified
                    by a qualified preceptor, if they have not completed a Midwifery Education
                    Accreditation Council (MEAC) accredited educational program in midwifery.

      29.   Doula is a trained non-medical professional that provides continuous physical, emotional
            and informational support to birthing individuals before, during and after childbirth.

      30.   Federally Qualified Health Center (FQHC) means a health care entity that has been
            awarded a Section 330 Grant from the Health Resources and Services Administration. A
            health care entity that has been designated as a “look-alike” is also eligible to be enrolled
            as an FQHC.

      31.   Foreign Teaching Physician means an individual who is licensed as a distinguished
            foreign teaching physician by the Colorado Medical Board within the Colorado
            Department of Regulatory Agencies.




                                                                                                      157
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                     10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


      32.   Home and Community Based Services (HCBS) means Health First Colorado (Colorado’s
            Medicaid Program)’s community-based care alternatives to institutional, Long-Term care.
            Providers enrolling as an HCBS provider shall meet all applicable state and federal
            requirements to provide HCBS by waiver and specialty type.

      33.   Home Health Agency means a health care entity that:

            a.      Has a Class A Home Care Agency license from the Colorado Department of
                    Public Health and Environment; and

            b.      Is certified by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services to participate in
                    the Medicare program as Home Health Agency.

      34.   Hospice means a health care entity that is:

            a.      Licensed as a Hospice by the Colorado Department of Public Health and
                    Environment; and

            b.      Certified by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services to participate in the
                    Medicare program as a Hospice.

      35.   Hospital - General means a health care entity that is:

            a.      Licensed as a General Hospital by the Colorado Department of Public Health and
                    Environment; and

            b.      Certified by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services to participate in the
                    Medicare program as a Hospital.

      36.   Hospital - Psychiatric [Formerly Known as Hospital - Mental] means a health care entity
            that is:

            a.      Licensed as a Psychiatric Hospital by the Colorado Department of Public Health
                    and Environment; and

            b.      Certified by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services to participate in the
                    Medicare program as a Psychiatric Hospital.

      37.   Independent Laboratory means a laboratory that:

            a.      Has a current and valid Clinical Laboratory Improvement Amendments (CLIA)
                    certification

      38.   Indian Health Service - Federally Qualified Health Center (FQHC) means a health care
            entity that:

            a.      Is treated by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services as a
                    comprehensive Federally funded health center; and

            b.      Includes an outpatient health program or facility operated by a tribe or tribal
                    organization under the Indian Self-Determination Act or by an urban Indian
                    organization receiving funds under Title V of the Indian Health Care Improvement
                    Act for the provision of primary health services.




                                                                                                   158
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                         10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


      39.   Indian Health Service - Pharmacy means a health care entity that has evidence of
            participation in the Indian Health Service.

      40.   Intermediate Care Facility for Individuals with Intellectual Disabilities (ICF/IID) [Formerly
            Known as Nursing Facility - ICF/IID] means a health care entity that is:

            a.      Licensed as an Intermediate Care Facility for Individuals with Intellectual
                    Disabilities through the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment

      41.   Lactation Consultant means an International Board Certified Lactation Consultant
            (IBCLC) with current certification by the International Board of Lactation Consultant
            Examiners (IBLCE).

      42.   Lactation Counselor/Educator means a health care professional certified as either:

            a.      A Certified Lactation Counselor (CLC) with current certification by the Academy
                    of Lactation Policy and Practice, Inc. (ALPP); or

            b.      A Certified Lactation Educator (CLE) with current certification by the Childbirth
                    and Postpartum Professional Association (CAPPA).

      43.   Lactation/Doula Professional Group means any group practice consisting of any of the
            following professionals who are enrolled with the Department as approved providers:

            a.      International Board Certified Lactation Consultant;

            b.      Doula

      44.   Licensed Behavioral Health Clinician means an individual that is licensed by the Colorado
            Department of Regulatory Agencies as either:

            a.      A Licensed Clinical Social Worker;

            b.      A Licensed Professional Counselor;

            c.      A Licensed Marriage and Family Therapist; or

            d.      A Licensed Addiction Counselor.

      45.   Licensed Psychologist means an individual who is licensed as a psychologist by the
            State Board of Psychologist Examiners within the Colorado Department of Regulatory
            Agencies.

      46.   Managed Care Entity [Formerly Known as Health Maintenance Organization (HMO)]
            means an entity that has a valid and comprehensive or all-inclusive risk contract with the
            Colorado Department of Health Care Policy and Financing.

      47.   Medicare Only Providers means a provider enrolled in the Medical Assistance Program
            for purposes of Medicare cost-sharing only, pursuant to 42 CFR §455.410(d).

      48.   Non-Physician Practitioner Group means any group practice consisting of any of the
            following:

            a.      Licensed Nurse Practitioners;




                                                                                                       159
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                       10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


            b.      Licensed Audiologists;

            c.      Licensed Occupational Therapists;

            d.      Licensed Behavioral Health Clinicians;

            e.      Licensed Psychologists;

            f.      Licensed Speech Therapists

            g.      Licensed Physical Therapists

            h.      Licensed Nurse Midwives; and/or

            i.      Certified Registered Nurse Anesthetists

      49.   Non-Physician Practitioner Individual means a registered nurse, which means an
            individual licensed as a Registered Nurse by the State Board of Nursing within the
            Colorado Department of Regulatory Agencies.

      50.   Nurse Midwife means an individual who is:

            a.      Licensed as a registered nurse by the State Board of Nursing within the Colorado
                    Department of Regulatory Agencies; and

            b.      Included within the advanced practice registry as a Nurse Midwife with
                    certification from the American Midwifery Certification Board (AMCB) and a
                    graduate-level education program accredited by the Accreditation Commission
                    for Midwifery Education (ACME).

      51.   Nurse Practitioner means an individual who is:

            a.      Licensed as a registered nurse by the State Board of Nursing within the Colorado
                    Department of Regulatory Agencies; and

            b.      Included within the advanced practice registry as a Nurse Practitioner.

      52.   Nursing Facility means a health care entity that is:

            a.      Licensed as a Nursing Care Facility through the Colorado Department of Public
                    Health and Environment; and

            b.      Certified by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services or the Colorado
                    Department of Health Care Policy and Financing to participate in the Medicaid
                    program as a Skilled Nursing Care Facility.

      53.   Occupational Therapist means an individual who is licensed as an Occupational
            Therapist by the Director of the Division of Professions and Occupations within the
            Colorado Department of Regulatory Agencies.

      54.   Optical Outlet means a health care supplier that is qualified to make and supply
            eyeglasses and contact lenses for the correction of vision. If, in the performance of its
            duties, the Optical Outlet requires laboratory services, the laboratory is required to have a
            current and valid Clinical Laboratory Improvement Amendments (CLIA) certification.




                                                                                                     160
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                       10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


      55.   Optometrist means an individual who is licensed as an Optometrist by the State Board of
            Optometry within the Colorado Department of Regulatory Agencies.

      56.   Osteopath means an individual who holds a degree of “doctor of osteopathy,” and who is
            licensed as a physician by the Colorado Medical Board within the Colorado Department
            of Regulatory Agencies.

      57.   Personal Care Agency means a health care entity that has a Class A or Class B Home
            Care Agency license from the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment.

      58.   Pharmacist means an individual who is licensed as a Pharmacist by the State Board of
            Pharmacy within the Colorado Department of Regulatory Agencies.

      59.   Pharmacy means a pharmacy, pharmacy outlet, or prescription drug outlet registered by
            the Board of Pharmacy within the Colorado Department of Regulatory Agencies.

      60.   Physical Therapist means an individual who is licensed as a Physical Therapist by the
            Physical Therapy Board within the Colorado Department of Regulatory Agencies.

      61.   Physician means an individual who is licensed as a physician by the Colorado Medical
            Board within the Colorado Department of Regulatory Agencies.

      62.   Physician Assistant means an individual who is licensed as a physician assistant by the
            Colorado Medical Board within the Colorado Department of Regulatory Agencies.

      63.   Podiatrist means an individual licensed as a podiatrist by the Colorado Podiatry Board
            within the Colorado Department of Regulatory Agencies.

      64.   Psychiatric Residential Treatment Facility (PRTF) means a health care entity that:

            a.      Is licensed by the Colorado Department of Human Services as a Residential
                    Child Care Facility and a Psychiatric Residential Treatment Facility (PRTF); and

            b.      Is certified as a qualified residential provider by the Department of Public Health
                    and Environment; and

            c.      Is accredited by the Joint Commission, the Commission on Accreditation of
                    Rehabilitation Facilities, or the Council on Accreditation of Services for Families
                    and Children; and

            d.      Has provided an attestation to the Department that the Psychiatric Residential
                    Treatment Facility (PRTF) is in compliance with the conditions of participation as
                    required by Colorado Department of Human Services and the Centers for
                    Medicare and Medicaid Services.

      65.   Qualified Residential Treatment Program (QRTP) means a facility that has:

            a.      A timelimited child care License from Department of Early Childhood, Division of
                    Early Learning Licensing and Administration indicating Service Type as: Qualified
                    Residential Treatment Program.

            b.      Received accreditation by the Joint Commission, the Commission on
                    Accreditation of Rehabilitation Facilities, or Council on Accreditation of Services
                    for Families and Children; and




                                                                                                     161
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                        10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


            c.      For facilities enrolling with Health First Colorado (Residential Child Care Facility
                    (RCCF) & Qualified Residential Treatment Program (QRTP)), a completed
                    attestation form.

      66.   Regional Accountable Entity (RAE) means an entity that has entered into a valid, existing
            contract with the Colorado Department of Health Care Policy and Financing to be a
            Regional Accountable Entity.

      67.   Rehabilitation Agency means a group practice that requires at least one affiliated and
            licensed professional enrolled in the Colorado Medical Assistance Program.

      68.   Residential Child Care Facility (RCCF) means a health care entity that is:

            a.      Designated by the Colorado Department of Human Services to provide Medicaid-
                    reimbursable mental health services as a Residential Child Care Facility (RCCF);
                    and

            b.      Licensed by Colorado Department of Human Services as a Residential Child
                    Care Facility (RCCF).

      69.   Rural Health Clinic (RHC) means a clinic that is certified by the Centers for Medicare and
            Medicaid Services as a Rural Health Clinic.

      70.   School Health Services means a school district or Board of Cooperative Educational
            Services that has a valid, active contract with the Colorado Department of Health Care
            Policy and Financing to participate in the Colorado School Health Services Program.

            a.      The Site at which an Organization Health Care Provider delivers medical care,
                    services, or goods authorized under the Medical Assistance Program enrolled
                    under the Provider Type of School Health Services is a school district.

      71.   School Speech Therapist means an individual with a Colorado Department of Education
            (CDE) Special Services License with a Speech Therapist Endorsement.

      72.   Speech Therapist is an individual certified as a Speech Language Pathologist by the
            Director of the Divisions of Professions and Occupations within the Colorado Department
            of Regulatory Agencies.

      73.   Substance Use Disorder (SUD) continuum means all levels of SUD services as defined
            by American Society of Addiction Medicine criteria. SUD services are grouped into
            outpatient, high intensity outpatient, residential and inpatient hospital levels of care.

      74.   Supply means a Durable Medical Equipment, Prosthetic, Orthotic and Supplies
            (DMEPOS) provider that meets one or both of the following definitions::

            a.      Complex Rehabilitation Technology (CRT) Supplier means a health care supplier
                    that meets all the requirements of Section 8.590.5.D, and that:

                    (1)     Has a Sales Tax Certificate or Tax-Exempt Certificate;

                    (2)     Has Complex Rehabilitation Technology (CRT) Professional
                            Certification; and




                                                                                                      162
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                     10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


                    (3)     Is accredited by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services to
                            provide Durable Medical Equipment, Prosthetic, Orthotic and Supplies
                            (DMEPOS) and Complex Rehabilitation Technology (CRT).

            b.      Durable Medical Equipment (DME) means a health care supplier that meets the
                    requirements of Sections 8.590.5.A and B, and that:

                    (1)     Has a Sales Tax Certificate or Tax-Exempt Certificate; and

                    (2)     Is accredited by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services to
                            provide Durable Medical Equipment, Prosthetic, Orthotic and Supplies
                            (DMEPOS).

      75.   Transportation means a provider that meets one or both of the following definitions:

            a.      Emergency Medical Transportation (EMT) [Formerly Known as Emergency
                    Medical Transportation and Air Ambulance] means providers that:

                    (1)     Meet all provider screening requirements in Section 8.125.

                    (2)     Comply with commercial liability insurance requirements.

                    (3)     Maintain the appropriate licensure for:

                            (a)     Ground ambulance license as required by Colorado Department
                                    of Public Health and Environment; and

                            (b)     Air ambulance license as required by Colorado Department of
                                    Public Health and Environment.

                    (4)     License, operate, and equip ground and air ambulances in accordance
                            with federal and state regulations.

            b.      Non-Emergent Medical Transportation (NEMT) means a provider that:

                    (1)     Has a Public Utilities Commission (PUC) common carrier certificate as a
                            taxicab; or

                    (2)     Has a ground ambulance license as required by Department of Public
                            Health and Environment; or

                    (3)     Has an Air Ambulance license as required by Colorado Department of
                            Public Health and Environment; or

                    (4)     Is exempt from licensure requirements in accordance with the Public
                            Utilities Commission (PUC).

      76.   X-Ray Facility means an imaging center that:

            a.      Has an X-Ray Facility and Machine Registration Report certified by the Colorado
                    Department of Public Health and Environment; and

            b.      Is certified by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services to participate in
                    Medicare as an X-Ray facility.




                                                                                                   163
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                           10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


K.     Service Facility Location Field means the physical location specifically where services were
       rendered as identified on the Claim.

L.     Site means the physical location by street address, including suite number, where goods and/or
       services are provided. The term Site when involving a Health Care Provider that voluntarily
       contracts with a Regional Accountable Entity (RAE) as a Primary Care Medical Provider (PCMP)
       to participate in the Department’s Accountable Care Collaborative (ACC) as a medical home, also
       includes the following requirements:

       1.      Primary Care Medical Provider (PCMP) services must be identifiable from other goods
               and/or services, including services provided by specialists provided by the Health Care
               Provider in the same physical location through a separate and unique National Provider
               Identifier (NPI).

       2.      Primary Care Medical Provider (PCMP) services provided at a Campus or Off-Campus
               Location must be identifiable from other goods and/or services, including services
               provided by specialists, provided by the Health Care Provider on the same Campus or
               Off-Campus Location through a separate and unique National Provider Identifier (NPI).

M.     Subpart means a component or separate physical location of an Organization Health Care
       Provider that may be separately licensed or certified. This definition is intended to be consistent
       with the use of the term “Subpart” as defined in 45 C.F.R. pt. 162.

N.     The definitions in Subsection 8.126.1 apply only to Section 8.126.

8.126.2 Enrollment of Health Care Providers

A.     Health Care Providers must enroll in the Medical Assistance Program through the Department’s
       Fiscal Agent, if they:

       1.      deliver medical care, services, or goods authorized under the Medical Assistance
               Program; and

       2.      are required to submit a Claim.

8.126.3 Health Care Provider Requirements to Obtain and Use a National Provider Identifier (NPI)

A.     A Health Care Provider that is required or eligible to obtain a National Provider Identifier (NPI)
       pursuant to 45 C.F.R. § 162.410 must:

       1.      Enroll with a unique National Provider Identifier (NPI) that identifies the Health Care
               Provider that delivers medical care, services, or goods authorized under the Medical
               Assistance Program; and

       2.      Utilize the Health Care Provider’s unique National Provider Identifier (NPI) for all Claims.

               a.       A Health Care Provider that is not enrolled as of January 1, 2020, must submit
                        every Claim using the unique National Provider Identifier (NPI) used for
                        enrollment that identifies both the Provider Type and Site effective for date-of-
                        services on or after January 1, 2020.

               b.       All Off Campus Locations must submit every Claim using the unique National
                        Provider Identifier (NPI) used for enrollment that identifies both the Provider Type
                        and Site effective for date-of-services on or after January 1, 2020.




                                                                                                            164
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                         10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


               c.      All Health Care Providers must submit every Claim using the unique National
                       Provider Identifier (NPI) used for enrollment that identifies both the Provider Type
                       and Site effective for date-of-services on or after January 1, 2021.

               d.      On every Claim, including Coordination of Benefits Agreement (COBA) automatic
                       crossover Claims, the Organization Health Care Provider shall use the Service
                       Facility Location Field to represent the most specific Site with a National Provider
                       Identifier (NPI) where the services are rendered unless the Billing Provider Field
                       represents the most specific Site with an NPI where the services are rendered.

8.126.4 Organization Health Care Provider Requirements to Obtain and Use a National Provider
Identifier (NPI)

A.     Each Organization Health Care Provider and each Subpart of an Organization Health Care
       Provider that is required or eligible to obtain an NPI pursuant to 45 C.F.R. § 162.410 must enroll
       using a unique National Provider Identifier (NPI).

       1.      Each Organization Health Care Provider must enroll using its unique National Provider
               Identifier (NPI) for each Site at which the Organization Health Care Provider delivers
               medical care, services, or goods authorized under the Medical Assistance Program.

               a.      A Hospital must enroll in the Medical Assistance Program with a unique National
                       Provider Identifier (NPI) for:

                       (1)      Its Campus; and

                       (2)      Each Off-Campus Location.

       2.      Each Organization Health Care Provider must enroll in the Medical Assistance Program
               using a unique National Provider Identifier (NPI) for each Provider Type at each Site from
               which the Organization Health Care Provider delivers medical care, services, or goods
               authorized under the Medical Assistance Program.

               a.      A Hospital must enroll with a unique National Provider Identifier (NPI) for each
                       Provider Type at each Site at its Campus and at each Off-Campus Location at
                       which it delivers medical care, services, or goods authorized under the Medical
                       Assistance Program.

       3.      An Organization Health Care Provider that is a School Health Services provider type
               must enroll once per School District and not each individual Site.

8.126.5 Health Care Provider Requirements Not Eligible to Receive a National Provider Identifier
(NPI)

A.     A Health Care Provider that is not eligible pursuant to 45 C.F.R. § 162.410 to receive a National
       Provider Identifier (NPI) shall:

       1.      Enroll without submitting a National Provider Identifier (NPI). The Health Care Provider
               must obtain a unique identification number assigned by the Department through its Fiscal
               Agent, that identifies both the unique Provider Type at each Site at which the Health Care
               Provider delivers medical care, services or goods authorized under the Medical
               Assistance Program; and

       2.      Use the unique identification number assigned by the Department through its Fiscal
               Agent on every Claim.




                                                                                                       165
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                               10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


                  a.      A Health Care Provider that is not eligible to obtain a National Provider Identifier
                          (NPI) that is not enrolled as of January 1, 2020, must submit every Claim using
                          the unique identification number used for enrollment that identifies both the
                          Provider Type and Site, effective January 1, 2020.

                  b.      All Health Care Providers that are not eligible to obtain a National Provider
                          Identifier (NPI) must submit every Claim using the unique identification number
                          used for enrollment that identifies both the Provider Type and Site, effective
                          January 1, 2021.

8.126.6 New Providers as of January 1, 2020

A.        A Health Care Provider that is not enrolled as of January 1, 2020, shall not apply to be enrolled to
          deliver medical care, services, or goods authorized under the Medical Assistance Program unless
          the Health Care Provider complies with Section 8.126.

8.126.7 Existing Providers as of January 1, 2021

A.        A Health Care Provider that is enrolled as of January 1, 2021, shall not apply to have their
          enrollment revalidated to deliver medical care, services, or goods authorized under the Medical
          Assistance Program, as required under 42 C.F.R. § 455.414, unless the Health Care Provider
          complies with Section 8.126.

8.130     PROVIDER PARTICIPATION

Providers will not discriminate on the basis of race, color, ethnic or national origin, ancestry, age, sex,
gender, sexual orientation, gender identity and expression, religion, creed, political beliefs, or disability.

8.130.1           DEFINITIONS

A.        “Advanced Directive” means a written instruction, such as a Living Will or Durable Power of
          Attorney for health care, recognized under state law, whether statutory or as recognized by the
          courts of the state, that relates to the provision of medical care when the individual is
          incapacitated.

B.        "Agent" means any person who has been delegated the authority to obligate or act on behalf of a
          Provider.

C.        “Change of Information” means any change in information contained in the Provider’s current
          enrollment record with the Department, including, but not limited to, any change to a person or
          entity who holds a direct or indirect ownership interest in the Provider exceeding five percent and
          any change to the Provider’s licensure, certification registration status, accreditation, bankruptcy
          status, address (including any change to location(s) where good and services are rendered),
          contact person, telephone number, email address, or criminal conviction disclosures within the
          scope of 42 CFR § 455.106.

D         “Change of Ownership” means that a Provider has been issued a new tax identification number.

E.        “Colorado Department of Health Care Policy and Financing” or “Department” means the Colorado
          State governmental agency responsible for the administration of the Medical Assistance Program,
          , Child Health Plan Plus, the old age pension health and medical care program, and the
          supplemental old age pension health and medical care program pursuant to Title XIX of the
          Social Security Act and Title 25.5 of the Colorado Revised Statutes.




                                                                                                             166
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                              10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


F.        “Inactivation” means a Provider’s billing privileges have been stopped but can be restored upon
          resolution of the basis of inactivation.

G.        “Provider” means any person, public or private institution, agency, or business concern enrolled
          under the state Medical Assistance Program to provide medical care, services, or goods, and
          holding, where applicable, a current valid license or certificate to provide such services or to
          dispense such goods.

H.        “Requesting Agency” means the US Department of Health and Human Services or its designees,
          the Department or its designees, the Colorado Department of Human Services or its designees,
          or the Medicaid Fraud Control Unit or its designees, acting through their representatives who
          have written or other authorization to act on behalf of these agencies.

8.130.2           MAINTENANCE OF RECORDS

A.        Each Provider shall:

          1.      Maintain legible, complete, and accurate records necessary to establish that conditions of
                  payment for Medical Assistance Program covered goods and services have been met,
                  and to fully disclose the basis for the type, frequency, extent, duration, and delivery of
                  goods and/or services provided to Medical Assistance Program members, including but
                  not limited to:

                  a.      Billings,

                  b.      Prior authorization requests,

                  c.      All medical records, service reports, and orders prescribing treatment plans,

                  d.      Records of goods prescribed, ordered for, or furnished to, members, and
                          unaltered copies of original invoices for such items,

                  e.      Records of all payments received from the Medical Assistance Program, and

                  f.      Records required elsewhere in Section 8.000 et seq.

          2.      The records shall be created at the time the goods or services are provided.

B.        Records of Providers shall include employment records, including but not limited to shift
          schedules, payroll records, and time-cards of employees.

C.        Providers who issue prescriptions shall keep in the patient's record, the date of each prescription
          and the name, strength, and quantity of the item prescribed.

D.        Records must be maintained for seven (7) years unless an additional retention period is required
          elsewhere in Section 8.000 et seq., or in an individual Provider participation agreement.

E.        Each Provider shall retain any other records created in the regular operation of business that
          relate to the type and extent of goods and/or services provided (for example, superbills). All
          records must be legible, verifiable, and must comply with generally accepted accounting
          principles, auditing standards, and all applicable state and federal laws, rules, and regulations.

F.        Each entry in a medical record must be signed and dated by the individual providing the medical
          service or good. Stamped signatures are not acceptable.




                                                                                                           167
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                               10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


G.        Providers utilizing electronic record-keeping may apply computerized signatures and dates to a
          medical record if their record-keeping systems guarantee the following security measures:

          1.      Restrict application of an electronic signature to the specific individual identified by the
                  signature. System security must prevent one person from signing another person's name.

          2.      Prevent alterations to authenticated (signed and dated) records. If the Provider chooses
                  to supplement a previous entry, the system must only allow a new entry that explains the
                  supplement. The Provider must not be allowed to change the initial entry.

          3.      Printed or displayed electronic records must note that signatures and dates have been
                  applied electronically.

H.        At the discretion of the Requesting Agency, record verification may include, but will not be limited
          to, interviews with Providers, employees of Providers, billing services that bill on behalf of
          Providers, and any member of a corporate structure that includes the Provider as a member.

8.130.3           ADVANCE DIRECTIVES

A.        Providers shall provide adult Medical Assistance Program members with written information
          about the individual's rights under state law to accept or refuse medical treatment, the right to
          formulate advance directives, and the Providers' policies regarding the implementation of such
          rights as follows:

          1.      Hospitals, at the time of the individual's admission as an inpatient.

          2.      Nursing facilities, at the time of the individual's admission as a resident.

          3.      Providers of home health care or personal care services, in advance of the individual
                  coming under the care of the Provider.

          4.      Hospice programs, at the time of initial receipt of hospice care by the individual from the
                  program.

          5.      Health maintenance organizations, at the time of enrollment of the individual with the
                  organization.

B.        The Provider shall maintain written policies and procedures with respect to all adult individuals
          receiving medical or personal care by or through the Provider, which shall include:

          1.      Documentation in the individual's medical records indicating whether the individual has
                  executed an advance directive.

          2.      Documentation that the individual will not be discriminated against, nor will the provision
                  of care be conditioned on whether he/she has executed an advance directive.

          3.      Documentation ensuring compliance with requirements of state law respecting advanced
                  directives.

          4.      Documentation in the individual's medical record substantiating the Provider's reason(s)
                  for non-compliance with an advance directive based on conscience or professional
                  ethics.

C.        Providers shall provide education for staff and the patient/member community on issues
          concerning advance directives.




                                                                                                              168
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                         10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


8.130.35       SCREENING FOR EXCLUDED EMPLOYEES AND CONTRACTORS

A.     As a condition of enrollment and participation in the Medical Assistance Program, each Provider
       shall comply with the following requirements for screening for employees and contractors who
       have been excluded from participation in Medicaid and Medicare by the US Department of Health
       & Human Services Office of Inspector General:

       1.      Each Provider shall utilize the US Department of Health & Human Services Office of
               Inspector General’s List of Excluded Individuals/Entities (www.oig.hhs.gov) to determine
               if a prospective employee or newly signed contractor has been excluded from
               participation in a Medical Assistance Program.

               a.      Such screening should be performed within five (5) business days of the date on
                       which the new employee was hired or new contract was signed.

       2.      Each Provider shall screen its employees and contractors against the List of Excluded
               Individuals/Entities at least monthly to capture any exclusions or reinstatements that have
               occurred since the last search of the database.

       3.      If a Provider determines that an employee or contractor of the Provider has been
               excluded, then the Provider shall report this to the Department within five (5) business
               days of the date of discovery.

       4.      Each screening must be documented in a manner that can be provided to the
               Department upon request.

B.     Except as otherwise provided in federal law, if the Medical Assistance Program pays for any
       goods or services furnished, ordered, or prescribed by an excluded individual or entity that is
       employed by or has contracted with a Provider, such payment shall constitute an overpayment
       and shall be subject to overpayment recovery, pursuant to Section 8.076. Such Provider may also
       be subject to sanctions by the Department, including the termination of the Provider agreement,
       as described at 8.076.5., if the Provider knew or should have known of the exclusion. The
       Provider may also be subject to civil and monetary penalties imposed by the US Department of
       Health and Human Services.

       1.      To the extent that such amount can be traced, the amount of the overpayment shall
               include any funds expended by the Medical Assistance Program to pay the excluded
               individual’s or contractor’s salary, expenses, or fringe benefits.

C.     Subject to federal law and the Department’s discretion, failure of a Provider to comply with the
       screening requirements listed at Section 8.130.35.A. may constitute good cause sufficient to
       justify termination of the Provider agreement, as described at 8.076.5.

8.130.40       PROVIDER EMPLOYEE OR CONTRACTOR LICENSE VERIFICATION

A.     As a condition of participation in the Medical Assistance program, any Provider who provides or
       who has employees or contractors who provide services or supplies must ensure that, at the time
       services or supplies are provided, the Provider, the employee, or the contractor possesses the
       license, certification, or credential that is required in the State of Colorado to provide such
       services or supplies.




                                                                                                          169
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                             10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


8.130.45       REPORTING CHANGES

A.     Within thirty-five (35) calendar days, Provider shall update the provider portal of the Department’s
       Medicaid Management Information System (MMIS) with any Change of Information or Change in
       Ownership.

B.     Failure by the Provider to notify the Department of any Change of Information or Change in
       Ownership in accordance with section 8.130.45.A.:

       1.      May result in the denial, suspension, inactivation, or termination of the Provider
               agreement or contract.

       2.      Does not exempt a Medical Assistance Program Provider from compliance with 10 CCR
               2505-3 and 10 CCR 2505-10.

8.130.50       REQUIREMENT TO VERIFY ENROLLMENT OF MEMBER AT TIME OF SERVICE

A.     A Provider shall verify and document that the member is enrolled in the applicable Medical
       Assistance Program at the time the service is rendered.

B.     A Provider shall verify that payments received are for medically necessary goods and services
       that were actually rendered, and that claims and encounters submitted for payment are true and
       correct.

8.130.60       PROVIDERS ARE RESPONSIBLE FOR ALL CLAIMS SUBMITTED

A.     A Provider shall accept full legal responsibility for all claims submitted under the Provider’s
       Medical Assistance Program ID number to the Medical Assistance Program, whether submitted
       by the Provider or submitted on the Provider’s behalf.

       1.      A Provider shall comply with all federal and state civil and criminal statutes, regulations,
               and rules relating to the delivery of goods and services to eligible individuals, and to the
               submission of claims for such goods and services. A Provider’s non-compliance may
               result in no payment for goods and services rendered.

B.     A Provider shall furnish to the Department its National Provider Identifier (NPI) (if eligible for an
       NPI) and include the NPI on all claims submitted pursuant to Sections 8.125.8 and 8.126.3.

C.     A Provider shall request payment only for those goods and services which are medically
       necessary, as such term is defined in Section 8.076.1.8. and in any other subsection of these
       rules defining medical necessity, and which are rendered personally by the Provider or rendered
       by qualified personnel under the Provider’s direct and personal supervision.

       1.      A Provider shall submit claims only for those goods and services provided by health care
               personnel who meet the professional qualifications established by the State.

       2.      Any misrepresentation or falsification of a claim submitted by a Provider, or on a
               Provider’s behalf, may subject the Provider to fines and/or imprisonment under state or
               federal law.

D.     If at any time the Department determines that a Provider has failed to maintain compliance with
       any state or federal laws, rules, or regulations, the Provider may be suspended from participation
       in the Medical Assistance Program, and may be subject to administrative actions authorized by
       federal or state law or regulation, criminal investigation, and/or prosecution.




                                                                                                           170
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                            10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


8.130.70       COMPLIANCE WITH GUIDANCE

A.     Providers must comply with all state and federal statutes, rules, regulations, and guidance.

B.     Guidance includes, but is not limited to:

       1.      Department Billing Manual

       2.      Department Provider Bulletins

       3.      Department Memo Series

       4.      Uniform Service Coding Standards

       5.      Current Procedural Terminology (CPT) code set

       6.      Current Healthcare Common Procedure Coding System (HCPCS)

       7.      Current International Classification of Diseases (ICD))

C.     Failure to comply may subject the Provider to authorized administrative actions, civil investigation,
       and criminal investigation.

8.130.80       INACTIVATING PROVIDER AGREEMENTS

A.     A Provider may have its Provider Participation Agreement inactivated and will no longer be able
       to bill for goods and services if any of the following occur:

       1.      The Provider’s license, certification, or accreditation has expired or is subject to
               conditions or restrictions.

       2.      The Provider has failed to complete Provider revalidation.

       3.      The Provider is no longer eligible to participate as a Medical Assistance Program
               Provider or breaches the Provider agreement.

       4.      There is a Change of Ownership.

       5.      The Provider’s business closes, or the business is nonoperational.

       6.      The Provider is deceased or retired.

       7.      The Provider is inactive and has not submitted any claims activity for 24 months.

B.     The Provider will be sent written notice thirty (30) days prior to the inactivation, unless otherwise
       required by federal or state statute, regulation, or rule.

       1.      The notice will detail the reason for the inactivation.

       2.      The notice will give the Provider the opportunity to dispute the inactivation.

C.     If the Provider elects to dispute the inactivation, the Department must receive the Provider’s
       written request to dispute the inactivation within thirty (30) calendar days of the date of the
       inactivation notice.




                                                                                                          171
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                                10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


D.      The Department will review the request and issue a determination on the inactivation which will
        include the Provider’s right to file an appeal in accordance with Section 8.050.

E.      The effective date of the inactivation may be backdated to the date of the occurrence described in
        Section 8.130.80.A.

8.170   STATE IDENTIFICATION NUMBER

.10     As medical assistance is administered on an individual recipient basis, rather than on a
        household basis, the individual recipient is uniquely identified. A state assigned number is used
        for this purpose. This state identification number consists of an alpha (letter) prefix, followed by a
        six-digit number. When an individual is approved for medical assistance, the state identification
        number is assigned. This number is transmitted to the county department via the automated
        system.

.20     The State Identification Number is the only numeric designation medical assistance providers will
        have, other than the name, to identify individuals. This number is required to be entered on all
        billing transactions.

        In order to carry out this responsibility for facilitating provision of medical benefits to recipients, to
        properly respond to inquiries from providers, to secure benefits of medical resources other than
        Medicaid (see 8.061 et seq.), and for other administrative purposes, county departments are to
        maintain cross reference files of household and medical identification numbers.

8.180   MEDICAL IDENTIFICATION CARDS AND DURATION OF ELIGIBILITY

8.181   IDENTIFICATION

.10     The state department will issue identification cards directly to clients who are eligible for benefits
        under a medical assistance program.

.20     The providers of benefits in the Department's medical assistance programs are instructed to use
        the identifying information to access an automated eligibility database to obtain the client's
        current or previous eligibility for medical assistance for a given date of service.

8.182   MEDICAL IDENTIFICATION CARD

Each eligible client shall have a medical identification card issued from the state department's office to
obtain medical services.

8.183   INSTRUCTIONS FOR HANDLING UNDELIVERED MEDICAL IDENTIFICATION CARDS

The Post Office returns all undelivered Medical Identification Cards to the county departments when
recipients are deceased, no longer at that address, etc. The following steps will be taken to assure
delivery of cards to the recipient.

        A.      If the address shown in the envelope window is incorrect or no longer valid, the county
                departments are not to make the address change for remailing on the returned envelope.
                Counties are to open the envelope, paste a white sticker over the incorrect address, type
                in the correct address, use a separate envelope with the corrected address, insert the
                Medical Identification Card Mailer, and remail the card and its carrier to the client's new
                (correct) address. (This includes out-of-state moves if the client remains eligible.)

        B.      Counties shall immediately correct the address on the automated system.




                                                                                                               172
CODE OF COLORADO REGULATIONS                                                               10 CCR 2505-10 8.100
Medical Services Board


          C.         If the recipient is deceased, the county shall destroy the identification card and make
                     appropriate change in the eligibility system.

8.190     ACUTE MEDICAL BENEFITS DETERMINATION

8.190.1 A client or provider may request a coverage determination for new acute medical benefits or
        services by submitting a written request to the Department.

8.190.1.A.       Written requests shall include documentation on all the following criteria regarding the
        benefit or service:

          1.         Prescribed by a doctor of medicine or osteopathy, or an optometrist, dentist or podiatrist
                     acting within the scope of their respective licenses;

          2.         A reasonable, appropriate and effective method for meeting the medical need;

          3.         The expected use is in accordance with current medical standards or practices;

          4.         Proven cost effective method of treatment;

          5.         Does not result in an unsafe environment or situation;

          6.         Not experimental, investigational and is accepted by the medical community as standard
                     practice;

          7.         Primary purpose is not to enhance personal comfort or convenience; and

          8.         Considered to be medically necessary for the diagnosis.

8.190.2          The requestor shall be notified in writing of the Department's decision regarding
          coverage.

_________________________________________________________________________

Editor’s Notes

10 CCR 2505-10 has been divided into smaller sections for ease of use. Versions prior to 03/04/2007,
Statements of Basis and Purpose, and rule history are located in the first section, 10 CCR 2505-10. Prior
versions can be accessed from the All Versions list on the rule's current version page. To view versions
effective on or after 03/04/2007, select the desired section of the rule, for example 10 CCR 2505-10
8.100, or 10 CCR 2505-10 8.500.

History
[For history of this section, see Editor’s Notes in the first section, 10 CCR 2505-10]




                                                                                                               173

