Source URL: https://www.law.cornell.edu/regulations/colorado/10-CCR-2505-10-8.063
Retrieved: 2026-09-23

10 CCR 2505-10-8.063 - MEDICAL ASSISTANCE ESTATE RECOVERY | State Regulations | US Law | LII / Legal Information Institute 

 Please help us improve our site!

 × 

 No thank you 

 Skip to main content 

 Cornell Law
 School 
 Search
 Cornell 

 Toggle navigation 

 Please help
 us improve our site! 

 Support Us! 

 Search 

 About
 LII 

 Who We Are 

 What We Do 

 Who Pays For This 

 Contact Us 

 Get the
 law 

 Constitution 

 Supreme Court 

 U.S. Code 

 CFR 

 Federal Rules 

 Federal Rules of Appellate Procedure 

 Federal Rules of Civil Procedure 

 Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure 

 Federal Rules of Evidence 

 Federal Rules of Bankruptcy Procedure 

 U.C.C. 

 Law by jurisdiction 

 State law 

 Uniform laws 

 Federal law 

 World law 

 Lawyer directory 

 Legal encyclopedia 

 Business law 

 Constitutional law 

 Criminal law 

 Family law 

 Employment law 

 Money and Finances 

 More... 

 Help out 

 Give 

 Sponsor 

 Advertise 

 Create 

 Promote 

 Join Lawyer Directory 

 LII 

 State Regulations 

 Colorado Administrative Code 

 Department 2505 - Department of Health Care Policy and Financing 

 2505 - Medical Services Board (Volume 8; Medical Assistance, Children's Health Plan) 

 10 CCR 2505-10-8.000 - MEDICAL ASSISTANCE - SECTION 8.000 Emergency Medical Transportation, Program Integrity 

 10 CCR 2505-10-8.063 - MEDICAL ASSISTANCE ESTATE RECOVERY

 10 CCR 2505-10-8.063 - MEDICAL ASSISTANCE ESTATE RECOVERY 

 State Regulations 

 Compare

 .11 The
 state department may seek to recover medical assistance expenditures correctly
 paid from the estates of deceased individuals as follows: 
 A. Recoveries of payments are made for all
 medical assistance paid on behalf of an individual who was institutionalized at
 the time he/she received medical assistance

 B. Recoveries of payments are made for
 nursing facility services, home and community-based services, and related
 hospital and prescription drug services paid on behalf of an individual who was
 55 years of age or older at the time he/she received medical assistance. The
 state department does not make the optional recoveries described under federal
 law in 42 U.S.C. §
 1396p(b)(1)(B)(ii) in the
 case of an individual described in this subsection.

 .12 The state department may limit estate
 recovery to recoveries that are cost-effective. The term "cost effective" means
 that the amount of medical assistance expenditures likely to be recovered is
 greater than the likely cost to the state of the recovery. 

 .13 The state department may file a lien on
 the real property of an institutionalized person for the amount of medical
 assistance correctly paid on behalf of the person, only if: 
 A. the department determines that the medical
 assistance recipient cannot reasonably be expected to be discharged from the
 institution and to return home; and 

 B. there is no spouse of the recipient
 lawfully residing in the home; and 

 C. there is no child of the recipient under
 age 21 or blind or disabled dependent of the recipient lawfully residing in the
 home; and 

 D. there is no sibling of the recipient who
 has an equity interest in the home and who was lawfully residing in the home
 for at least one year immediately prior to the date the recipient was admitted
 to the institution; and 

 E. later recovery from the estate is likely
 to be cost-effective. 
 Medical assistance payments made on behalf of an
 institutionalized recipient during the time that all lien criteria are not met
 will be subject to a lien at such time that all lien criteria are met.

 .14 The state
 department shall determine whether a medical assistance recipient reasonably
 can be expected to be discharged from the institution and to return home. This
 determination shall be made by the Utilization Review Contractor after notice
 and opportunity for a hearing. The determination that the recipient is not
 likely to return home will be used to decide if a lien will be filed. This
 determination will not change an exempt home into a
 countable resource for eligibility purposes. 
 The notice to the recipient shall include the
 following:

 A. A statement of the
 action that the Utilization Review Contractor intends to take, the reasons for
 the intended action, and the specific regulations that support the
 action.

 B. An explanation of the
 term "lien", and that imposing a lien does not mean that the individual will
 lose ownership of the home.

 C. A
 statement that the determination will not result in a loss of eligibility for
 medical assistance benefits.

 D. The
 process by which a recipient may request a hearing to appeal the decision of
 the Utilization Review Contractor. 
 The decision may be appealed through the procedures in the
 RECIPIENT APPEALS PROTOCOLS/PROCESS Section of this staff manual.

 The state department shall dissolve any lien on a recipient's
 home if the recipient is discharged from the institution and returns to the
 home subject to the lien.

 .15 The state department shall not recover
 medical assistance expenditures correctly paid from the estate of a medical
 assistance recipient if: A. There is a
 surviving spouse of the recipient; or 

 B. There is a child of the recipient under
 age 21 or a blind or disabled dependent of the recipient.

 8.063.16 In addition to the prohibitions of
 8.063.15, the state department shall not recover medical assistance
 expenditures correctly paid from the sale of the recipient's home, whether or
 not the home was subject to a lien, if: A. 
 there is a sibling of the recipient who was lawfully residing in the home for
 at least one year immediately prior to the date the recipient was admitted to
 the institution and who has continuously lived in the home since that date;
 or 

 B. 
 there is a son or daughter of the recipient who was lawfully residing in the
 home for at least two years immediately prior to the date the recipient was
 admitted to the institution and who has continuously lived in the home since
 that date, and who provided care to the recipient which permitted the recipient
 to reside at home rather than in an institution. 
 If either of the two conditions above exist, the state
 department may recover medical assistance expenditures correctly paid from
 assets in the estate other than the sale of the recipient's home.

 .17 The state
 department shall file liens and recover expenditures for medical assistance
 provided on or after July 1, 1992.

 .18 The state department may compromise,
 settle, or waive recovery of medical assistance expenditures if it determines
 good cause to do so. The department shall determine that good cause exists if: 
 A. it concludes that without receipt of the
 proceeds of the estate, the heirs would become eligible for assistance payments
 and/or medical assistance programs; or 

 B. it concludes that allowing the heirs to
 receive the inheritance from the estate will enable these individuals to
 discontinue eligibility for assistance payments and/or medical assistance
 programs; or 

 C. it concludes that the home is part of a
 business, including a working farm or ranch, and recovery of medical assistance
 expenditures will result in the heirs to the estate losing their means of
 livelihood.

 .19 The
 state department may agree to a payment plan for repayment of any debt owed the
 state under the Medical Assistance Estate Recovery Program.

 Notes

 10 CCR 2505-10-8.063 

 State regulations are updated quarterly; we currently have two versions available.
 Below is a comparison between our most recent version and the prior quarterly release. 
 More comparison features will be added as we have more versions to compare.

 No prior version found.

 State Regulations Toolbox

 Accessibility 

 About LII 

 Contact us 

 Advertise here 

 Help 

 Terms of use 

 Privacy
