Source URL: https://dhcf.dc.gov/sites/default/files/dc/sites/dhcf/publication/attachments/DHCFStatePlanAttach4-17a.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-09-23

Revision:      HCFA-PM-95-3     (MB)                              Attachment 4.17-A
               MAY 1995                                           Page 1

                     STATE PLAN UNDER TITLE XIX OF THE SOCIAL SECURITY ACT

                            State/Territory:   District of Columbia

                           LIENS AND ADJUSTMENTS OR RECOVERIES

1.   The State uses the following process for determining that an
     institutionalized individual cannot reasonably be expected to be discharged
     from the medical institution and return home:

     ;N/A


2.   The following criteria are used for establishing that a permanently
     institutionalized individual's son or daughter provided care as specified
     under regulations at 42 CFR §433.36(f):

     N/A


3.   The State defines the terms below as" follows:

     •      estate

            The property which must be included in an individual's estate as set
            forth in the District's Probate law (D.C. Official Code § 20-101(1) is
            as follows:
            "Real and personal property and any interest in such propferty that is
            owned by the decedent and that does not pass at the time of decedent's
            death to another person by the terms of the instrument under which it is
            held, or by operation of law."


     •      individual's home

            Any dwelling unit in which an individual has an ownership interest and is
            used as the individual's principal place of residence; such dwelling
            unit may consist of a house, boat, trailer, mobile home or other
            habitation. It is the dwelling that the individual considers his or her
            fixed or permanent residence and to which, whenever absent, the person
            intends to return. The individual's home includes the real property on
            which the dwelling is located, all tangible personal property located
            therein, and any related outbuildings located on the property. Only one
            dwelling unit may be considered an individual's home. Outbuildings
            necessary to the operation of the home include garage, shed and other
            buildings for the individual's consumption. An individual's home, in
            most instances, is located within the District of Columbia. However, an
            individual's home may be located outside the District of Columbia.


     •      equity interest in the home

            The value of an individual's home less the unpaid principal balance of
            any loans or other liens or encumbrance affecting the individual's home.


TN No. 06-01                            t LP V ^
Supersedes              Approval Date                  Effective Date 10/01/2005_
TN No. NEW
Revision:    HCFA-PM-95-3       (MB)                                 Attachment 4.17-A
             MAY 1995                                                Page 2


     •   residing in the home for at least one or two years on a continuous basis,

            N/A

     •   on a continuous basis

            N/A

     •   discharge from the medical institution and return home, and

            N/A

     •   lawfully residing.

         Maintaining the domicile legitimately or without violating the law, as
         evidenced by the receipt of mail at the residence, and/or the payment of
         property taxes, property insurance and utility expenses for the
         Residence.


4.   The State defines undue hardship as follows:

     The Department of Health, Medical Assistance Administration (MAA) may waive
     enforcement of any estate recovery claim if it finds that enforcing the
     claim would result in an undue hardship to the beneficiaries, heirs, or
     family claiming entitlement to receive the assets of the deceased Medicaid
     recipient. Undue hardship exits if any one of the following Criteria has
     been met:

            •     Heir/heirs would become eligible for assistance payments without
                  receipt of the proceeds from the estate.
            •     Allowing heir/heirs to receive proceeds from an estate, the
                  heir/heirs would become ineligible for assistance payments.
            •     Home is the sole income producing assets of a family business and
                  recovery would result in the heir/heirs losing their means of
                  livelihood. The following two (2) conditions must be met to
                  qualify:
                     1. The family business has been in operation at the property
                        for at least 12 months preceding the death; and
                     2. Income from the business provides 100% of the surviving
                        heir/heirs livelihood.
            •     Recovery would deprive the heir or heirs to the property of
                  shelter and the heir/heirs lacks the financial means to obtain and
                  maintain alternative shelter.

     Any exemption described in 4 above applies only to the proportionate share
     of the decedent's estate or property that passes to each heir.

     Undue hardship does not exist when:

         Recovery would merely cause the decedent's family members or heir(s)
         inconvenience or restrict the family's or heir(s) lifestyle.



TN No. 06-01                           r.T-:; (i I; 2006
Supersedes              Approval Date                      Effective Date 10/01/2005,
TN No. NEW
Revision:     HCFA-PM-95-3    (MB)                             Attachment 4.17-A
              MAY 1995                                         Page 3


       The heir or heirs divests assets to qualify under the undue hardship
       provision.

Recovery will merely prevent any heir/heirs from receiving an anticipated
inheritance.


   5 . The following standards and procedures are used by the State for waiving
       estate recoveries when recovery would cause an undue hardship, and when
       recovery is not cost-effective:

       Procedures

            •   Applicants are notified at the time of application for medical
                assistance that recoveries against their estates may be
                undertaken. (There is a statement to this effect on the Government
                of the District of Columbia, Department of Human Services,
                Application for Benefits, Part D. Medical and Financial
                Assistance, Question 7.)
            •   Before asserting a recovery against the estate of a deceased
                Medicaid recipient, the MAA, Office of Program Integrity, Third
                Party Liability (TPL) Unit notifies the personal
                representative/attorney/survivors or heirs in writing that a
                procedure exists to apply for a hardship waiver. Also, the notice
                instructs the personal representative to contact the TPL Unit for
                a copy of the Request for Hardship Waiver Application.
            •   All disapproval notices shall a statement informing fine Personal
                Representative of all appeal rights.
            •   MAA may compromise its claim when collection of the full amount
                would result in an undue hardship.

       Cost Effectiveness

            •   MAA has determined that recovery of a Medical Assistance claim
                payment of $100.00 or less against the estate is not cost-
                effective because the amount of time, effort, and cost expended by
                staff are not equal to or greater than the net proceeds to be
                recovered.

   6. The State defines cost-effective as follows (include
      methodology/thresholds used to determine cost-effectiveness) :

      Recovery shall be considered cost-effective when MAA's claim is over
      $100.00. A total medical assistance payment of $100 or less is waived as
      not cost-effective since the court fee (from $15.00 to $50.00), standard
      probate fee ($65.00), the regular probate fee ($28.00) and staff time to
      process the claim exceed the net proceeds to be recovered.

   7. The State uses the following collection procedures (include specific
      elements contained in the advance notice requirement, the method for
      applying for a waiver, appeal procedures, and time frames involved) :

            •   Applicants are notified at the time of application that recoveries


TN NO. 06-Qi                         rr-)
Supersedes            Approval Date __         ___   Effective Date 10/01/2005_
TN No . NEW
Revision:   HCFA-PM-95-3      (MB)                                    Attachment 4.17-A
            MAY 1995                                                  Page 4

                against their estates may be undertaken (see response #5).
            •   TPL Unit may be notified from various sources regarding the deaths
                of D.C. Medicaid recipients. The most common sources of estate
                leads are Information Exchange/DHS-886, Superior Court Listing of
                all petitioned estates, written notification from the nursing
                facilities of deceased recipients and Medicaid Management
                Information System Report of Deceased Recipients aged 55 and
                older.
            •   Staff conducts research to verify if the decedent was a Medicaid
                recipient and if so, to determine if an estate exists.
            •   Staff provides advance written notice to the personal
                representative/attorney of record of any proposed recovery and the
                method for applying for an undue hardship waiver, the appeal
                rights and all relevant time frames and due dates. The following
                information is sent to the personal representative/attorney of
                record:
                 1. Itemization of the claims of medical services paid by
                    Medicaid;
                 2. The legal basis for the claim;
                 3. Exemptions from recovery; and
                 4. The procedures for applying for undue hardship.
            The personal representative/attorney of record has 15 business days to
            request a copy of the Request for Undue Hardship Waiver Application. •
            A completed undue hardship application form and supporting documents
            must be filed within 30 calendar days of the date that MAA sends the
            Application to the personal representative/attorney of Record. A
            completed Application means that the form has been completed in its
            entirety, and all documents that support the household's circumstances
            have been provided to the TPL Unit within 30 days of the date that MAA
            sends the Application. When the required documents are not filed
            within the 30-day timeframe, the Application is incomplete and will be
            denied, and the full amount of the claim will remain in force. The
            TPL Unit will issue a denial notice, which will include the reason(s)
            for the denial and the appeal rights and process, and notice that the
            surviving heir(s) has 5 additional working days to file the required
            documents. If the required documents are filed within the five
            working days, the Application is considered complete and the undue
            hardship application is processed. If the required documents are not
            filed within the five working days, the Application is incomplete and
            will be denied, and the full amount of the claim will remain in force.

       •    When a complete and timely application is received, the MAA/OPI/TPL
            shall review supporting documents and makes a determination. The
            personal representative/attorney of record is sent a notice of the
            decision within 30 days, which includes information regarding all
            appeal rights, and the basis for the decision. Any appeal must be
            filed with the Office of Administrative Hearings within 30 calendar
            days from the date of the final denial.




                                     i^-r-, fi) K <i-nf|C
TN No. 06-01
Supersedes            Approval Date                         Effective Date 1Q/01/2005_
TN No. NEW

