Source URL: https://www.law.cornell.edu/regulations/georgia/Ga-Comp-R-Regs-R-111-3-8-.07
Retrieved: 2026-09-23

Ga. Comp. R. & Regs. R. 111-3-8-.07 - Imposition of Liens | State Regulations | US Law | LII / Legal Information Institute 

 Please help us improve our site!

 × 

 No thank you 

 Skip to main content 

 Cornell Law
 School 
 Search
 Cornell 

 Toggle navigation 

 Please help
 us improve our site! 

 Support Us! 

 Search 

 About
 LII 

 Who We Are 

 What We Do 

 Who Pays For This 

 Contact Us 

 Get the
 law 

 Constitution 

 Supreme Court 

 U.S. Code 

 CFR 

 Federal Rules 

 Federal Rules of Appellate Procedure 

 Federal Rules of Civil Procedure 

 Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure 

 Federal Rules of Evidence 

 Federal Rules of Bankruptcy Procedure 

 U.C.C. 

 Law by jurisdiction 

 State law 

 Uniform laws 

 Federal law 

 World law 

 Lawyer directory 

 Legal encyclopedia 

 Business law 

 Constitutional law 

 Criminal law 

 Family law 

 Employment law 

 Money and Finances 

 More... 

 Help out 

 Give 

 Sponsor 

 Advertise 

 Create 

 Promote 

 Join Lawyer Directory 

 LII 

 State Regulations 

 Georgia Compiled Rules & Regulations 

 Department 111 - RULES OF DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNITY HEALTH 

 Chapter 111-3 - MEDICAL ASSISTANCE 

 Subject 111-3-8 - ESTATE RECOVERY 

 Ga. Comp. R. & Regs. R. 111-3-8-.07 - Imposition of Liens

 Ga. Comp. R. & Regs. R. 111-3-8-.07 - Imposition of Liens 

 State Regulations 

 Compare

 (1) 
 The basis for authority to impose liens is based on the Tax Equity and Fiscal
 Responsibility Act of 1982 (TEFRA). The TEFRA lien law provides that the agency
 can place a Lien on the available real estate of a Member who enters a nursing
 home and is "permanently institutionalized."

 (2) The state may place a Lien on the
 Member's home when there is not a reasonable expectation that the Member will
 return home and when none of the following persons are living in the home: 
 (a) The Member's spouse;

 (b) A child under twenty-one (21) years of
 age;

 (c) A disabled child of any
 age; or

 (d) A sibling with an
 equity interest in the home who has lived in the home for at least one (1) year
 before the Member entered the nursing home, and is lawfully residing in such
 home. The sibling must provide the State with clear and convincing evidence
 which demonstrates residency on a continuous basis and the sibling's equity
 interest. Additionally, the sibling must demonstrate that he or she did not
 reside in any other residence except the Member's home during the period of
 time specified in this subparagraph (2)(d). The sibling has the burden of proof
 in all proceedings.

 (3) 
 Liens may be imposed to protect recovery of benefits correctly paid to Medicaid
 Members when permitted by federal and state law. However, the use of lien
 authority requires prior notification to the Member or any known
 Heirs.

 (4) The Department shall
 notify the Member and the authorized representative, if applicable, of its
 determination that the Member is permanently institutionalized and not
 reasonably expected to return home and its intent to file a Lien on Member's
 real property. Notice must include an explanation of liens and their effect on
 a Member's ownership of real property. A Lien may not be filed less than
 thirty-one (31) days from the date of the notice to the Member and after any
 hearing process has been completed, if a hearing is requested.

 (5) A Member or his or her authorized
 representative may, within thirty (30) days after receipt of notice request an
 administrative hearing under this Rule
 111-3-8-.07 . A Member is deemed to
 have received notice within five (5) days from the date of the notice.
 Administrative hearings and appeals for Medicaid Members are governed by the
 procedures and time limits set forth in
 42 C.F.R. §
 431.200 
 et seq . Only one (1)
 appeal shall be afforded on behalf of a Member, for each notice received. The
 administrative law judge shall make the determination if a Member can or cannot
 reasonably be expected to be discharged from the medical institution and
 returned home or if a specific exception set forth in
 111-3-8-.07 (2) 
 applies.

 (6) The Department or its
 agent shall file a notice of Lien with the recorder of the county in which the
 real property subject to the Lien is located. The notice shall be filed prior
 to the Member's death and shall include the following: 
 (a) Name and place of residence, including
 the street and county in which the property is located, of the real property
 subject to the Lien; or

 (b) Legal
 description of the real property subject to the Lien.

 (7) The Department shall file one (1) copy of
 the notice of Lien with the local DFCS office in the county in which the real
 property is located. The county in which the real property is located shall
 retain a copy of the notice with the county office's records. The Department or
 its agent shall provide one (1) copy of the notice of Lien to the Member and
 the Member's authorized representative, if applicable, whose real property is
 affected.

 (8) The Lien continues
 from the date of filing until the Lien is satisfied, released or expires. From
 the date on which the notice of Lien is recorded in the office of the county
 recorder, the notice of lien: (a) Constitutes
 due notice against the Member or Member's estate for any amount then
 recoverable under this article; and

 (b) Gives a specific Lien in favor of the
 Department on the Medicaid Member's interest in the real property.

 (9) The Department has the
 authority to release any lien placed upon the property of a Member deemed
 permanently institutionalized should that Member be subject to a discharge from
 a medical institution and return home. The Department shall release a lien
 obtained under this rule within thirty (30) days after the Department receives
 notice that the Member is no longer institutionalized and is living in his or
 her home. If the real property subject to the lien is sold, the office shall
 release its lien at the closing and the lien shall attach to the net proceeds
 of the sale.

 Notes

 Ga. Comp. R.
 & Regs. R. 111-3-8-.07 

 O.C.G.A. §
 49-4-147.1 , Ga. Comp. Rules &
 Regs., R.
 290-1-1-.01 . 

 Original Rule
 entitled "Imposition of Liens" adopted. F. July 16,
 2004 ; eff. August 5,
 2004 . 
 Amended: F. Sept. 15,
 2005 ; eff. Oct. 5,
 2005 . 
 Amended: F. Oct. 19,
 2006 ; eff. Nov. 8,
 2006 . 
 Amended: F. Mar. 27,
 2020 ; eff. Apr. 16,
 2020 . 

 State regulations are updated quarterly; we currently have two versions available.
 Below is a comparison between our most recent version and the prior quarterly release. 
 More comparison features will be added as we have more versions to compare.

 No prior version found.

 State Regulations Toolbox

 Accessibility 

 About LII 

 Contact us 

 Advertise here 

 Help 

 Terms of use 

 Privacy
