Source URL: https://www.law.cornell.edu/regulations/georgia/Ga-Comp-R-Regs-R-111-3-8-.08
Retrieved: 2026-09-23

Ga. Comp. R. & Regs. R. 111-3-8-.08 - Hardship Waiver | State Regulations | US Law | LII / Legal Information Institute 

 Please help us improve our site!

 × 

 No thank you 

 Skip to main content 

 Cornell Law
 School 
 Search
 Cornell 

 Toggle navigation 

 Please help
 us improve our site! 

 Support Us! 

 Search 

 About
 LII 

 Who We Are 

 What We Do 

 Who Pays For This 

 Contact Us 

 Get the
 law 

 Constitution 

 Supreme Court 

 U.S. Code 

 CFR 

 Federal Rules 

 Federal Rules of Appellate Procedure 

 Federal Rules of Civil Procedure 

 Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure 

 Federal Rules of Evidence 

 Federal Rules of Bankruptcy Procedure 

 U.C.C. 

 Law by jurisdiction 

 State law 

 Uniform laws 

 Federal law 

 World law 

 Lawyer directory 

 Legal encyclopedia 

 Business law 

 Constitutional law 

 Criminal law 

 Family law 

 Employment law 

 Money and Finances 

 More... 

 Help out 

 Give 

 Sponsor 

 Advertise 

 Create 

 Promote 

 Join Lawyer Directory 

 LII 

 State Regulations 

 Georgia Compiled Rules & Regulations 

 Department 111 - RULES OF DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNITY HEALTH 

 Chapter 111-3 - MEDICAL ASSISTANCE 

 Subject 111-3-8 - ESTATE RECOVERY 

 Ga. Comp. R. & Regs. R. 111-3-8-.08 - Hardship Waiver

 Ga. Comp. R. & Regs. R. 111-3-8-.08 - Hardship Waiver 

 State Regulations 

 Compare

 (1) 
 Hardship waivers will be submitted to the program administrator for review. The
 denial of a hardship waiver may be appealed as provided under the
 Administrative Procedures Act, O.C.G.A. §
 50-13-1 et. seq. The waiver is
 limited to the period in which the undue hardship exists.

 (2) There is no hardship waiver provided at
 the time of lien placement against the real property of a deceased Medicaid
 Member. The equity interest of the heir will be considered to determine the
 percentage of the deceased member's interest in the property.

 (3) Lien placement is utilized to delay
 recovery until such time as an exemption to recovery does not exist, or in the
 case of an undue hardship, until such time as the undue hardship no longer
 exists. The state's lien would be for the Medicaid benefits paid on behalf of
 the Member or the percentage of interest of the deceased Member at the time of
 sale, whichever is less.

 (4) 
 Recovery will be waived in whole or in part pursuant to Rule
 111-3-8-.08 (1) of
 any estate or lien recovery when the requesting party is able to show, through
 clear and convincing evidence, that the state's pursuit of recovery subjects
 them to undue hardship. In determining whether an undue hardship exists, the
 following criteria will be used: (a) The
 asset to be recovered is an income producing farm and sole income source of one
 or more of the Heirs and the annual gross income is limited to $25,000 or less
 and is not merely rental income; or

 (b) The recovery of assets would cause the
 applicant to become eligible for needs based governmental public assistance
 based on need and/or medical assistance programs.

 (5) Notwithstanding the provisions of
 Paragraph (4) of this Rule, an undue hardship exists when an estate has a gross
 value of $25,000 or less. Therefore, estates with a gross value of $25,000 or
 less are exempt from estate recovery. In this instance, undue hardship does not
 need to be asserted.

 (6) Undue
 hardship does not exist when: (a) The
 adjustment or recovery of the Member's cost of assistance would merely cause
 the Member's family members inconvenience or restrict the family's lifestyle;
 or

 (b) The Member and/or the Heirs
 divest assets to qualify under the undue hardship provision.

 (7) To the extent that there is
 any conflict between the preceding criteria and the standards that may be
 specified by the secretary of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services,
 the federal standards shall prevail.

 (8) The personal representative and/or Heirs
 shall apply for an undue hardship exemption by: 
 (a) Making a written request to the
 Department within thirty (30) days of receipt of the notice; and

 (b) Verifying to the Department's
 satisfaction the criteria specified in this section for an undue hardship
 waiver.

 (9) The
 Department shall issue a decision on an undue hardship exemption request within
 thirty (30) days of receipt of the request and supporting
 documentation.

 (10) If the state
 denies the personal representative's request for an undue hardship waiver, the
 personal representative may request an appeal. The denial of a waiver must
 state the requirements of an application for an adjudicative proceeding to
 contest the Department's decision to deny the waiver and where assistance may
 be obtained to make such application.

 (11) If an appeal is requested, a hearing
 shall be conducted by the probate judge if the estate is in probate court. An
 administrative law judge shall conduct the administrative hearing if the case
 is not in probate court.

 (12) If
 the Department deems an undue hardship does exist, the state may waive recovery
 or defer recovery until the death of eligible exempt dependents, on the sole
 discretion of the Department.

 (13) 
 The provisions of this section are severable. If any provision of this section
 is held invalid, the remaining provisions remain in effect.

 Notes

 Ga. Comp. R.
 & Regs. R. 111-3-8-.08 

 O.C.G.A. §
 49-4-147.1 . 

 Original Rule
 entitled "Hardship Waiver" adopted. F. July 16,
 2004 ; eff. August 5,
 2004 . 
 Amended: F. Aug. 17,
 2004 ; eff. Sept. 6,
 2004 . 
 Amended: F. Oct. 19,
 2006 ; eff. Nov. 8,
 2006 . 
 Amended: F. Mar. 27,
 2020 ; eff. Apr. 16,
 2020 . 

 State regulations are updated quarterly; we currently have two versions available.
 Below is a comparison between our most recent version and the prior quarterly release. 
 More comparison features will be added as we have more versions to compare.

 No prior version found.

 State Regulations Toolbox

 Accessibility 

 About LII 

 Contact us 

 Advertise here 

 Help 

 Terms of use 

 Privacy
