Source URL: https://www.law.cornell.edu/regulations/georgia/Ga-Comp-R-Regs-R-111-3-8-.02
Retrieved: 2026-09-23

Ga. Comp. R. & Regs. R. 111-3-8-.02 - Definitions | State Regulations | US Law | LII / Legal Information Institute 

 Please help us improve our site!

 × 

 No thank you 

 Skip to main content 

 Cornell Law
 School 
 Search
 Cornell 

 Toggle navigation 

 Please help
 us improve our site! 

 Support Us! 

 Search 

 About
 LII 

 Who We Are 

 What We Do 

 Who Pays For This 

 Contact Us 

 Get the
 law 

 Constitution 

 Supreme Court 

 U.S. Code 

 CFR 

 Federal Rules 

 Federal Rules of Appellate Procedure 

 Federal Rules of Civil Procedure 

 Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure 

 Federal Rules of Evidence 

 Federal Rules of Bankruptcy Procedure 

 U.C.C. 

 Law by jurisdiction 

 State law 

 Uniform laws 

 Federal law 

 World law 

 Lawyer directory 

 Legal encyclopedia 

 Business law 

 Constitutional law 

 Criminal law 

 Family law 

 Employment law 

 Money and Finances 

 More... 

 Help out 

 Give 

 Sponsor 

 Advertise 

 Create 

 Promote 

 Join Lawyer Directory 

 LII 

 State Regulations 

 Georgia Compiled Rules & Regulations 

 Department 111 - RULES OF DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNITY HEALTH 

 Chapter 111-3 - MEDICAL ASSISTANCE 

 Subject 111-3-8 - ESTATE RECOVERY 

 Ga. Comp. R. & Regs. R. 111-3-8-.02 - Definitions

 Ga. Comp. R. & Regs. R. 111-3-8-.02 - Definitions 

 State Regulations 

 Compare

 (1) "Authorized
 representative" means a guardian or a person designated by the Member to act on
 his or her behalf during the Member's life.

 (2) "Creditor" means an entity (person or
 institution) to whom an obligation is owed because a Member received something
 of value in exchange.

 (3) "Debt"
 means a sum of money owed from one person to another, including the right of
 the creditor to receive and enforce payment.

 (4) "Department" means the Georgia Department
 of Community Health, Division of Medical Assistance.

 (5) "Discharge from the medical institution
 and return home" means a qualifying discharge, which involves the Member's
 dismissal from the nursing institution and/or facility for at least thirty (30)
 days wherein the Member's personal effects and bed are released at the same
 time of his or her discharge.

 (6) 
 "Equity interest in the home" means value of the property in which the Member
 holds legal interest beyond the amount owed on it in mortgages and
 liens.

 (7) "Estate" means all real
 and personal property under the probate code, including real and personal
 property passing by reason of joint tenancy, right of survivorship, life
 estate, survivorship, trust, annuity, Individual Retirement Accounts, homestead
 or any other arrangement. Estate also includes excess funds from a burial trust
 or contract, promissory notes, cash, and personal property. Estates with a
 gross value of $25,000 or less are exempt from estate recovery.

 (8) "Hearing" means a formal proceeding
 before an Administrative Law Judge or Probate Judge in which an aggrieved party
 affected by an action or an intended action of the Department shall be allowed
 to present testimony, documentary evidence, and argument as to why such action
 should or should not be taken.

 (9) 
 "Heirs" means heirs-at-law who are entitled under the statutes of intestate
 succession to property of a decedent and beneficiaries who are entitled to
 inherit the estate if there is a lawful will.

 (10) "Lawfully residing" means permissive use
 by the owner/power of attorney at the law.

 (11) "Lien" means a claim, encumbrance or
 charge against the Medicaid Member's real or personal property on account of
 medical assistance paid to the Member correctly under the State Plan. A Lien
 may be placed on the real property of a Member who is an inpatient of a nursing
 facility, intermediate care facility for individuals with intellectual
 disabilities, or other institution or a Lien may be placed on both real and
 personal property of a Member after the Member's death.

 (12) "Long-term care" means a service
 provided in a long-term care facility or in the home, pursuant to federally
 approved home and community based services, as an alternative to
 institutionalization.

 (13) "Medical
 assistance" means payment by the State's program under Title XIX of the Social
 Security Act or Medicaid program administered by the Department.

 (14) "Member" means a person who has been
 certified as Medicaid eligible, pursuant to the terms of the State Plan, to
 have medical assistance paid on his or her behalf.

 (15) "Member's home" means a true, fixed and
 permanent domicile and principal establishment to which the Member has the
 intention of returning to whenever absent.

 (16) "Permanently institutionalized" means
 residing in a nursing facility or intermediate care facility for individuals
 with intellectual disabilities and developmentally disabled for six (6)
 consecutive months or more.

 (17) 
 "Personal representative" means an executor, administrator, guardian,
 conservator, committee, trustee, fiduciary, or other person having a status
 which by operation of law or written instrument confers upon such person a duty
 of distributing property to Heirs.

 (18) "On a continuous basis" means that the
 qualifying relative lived with the Member in the Member's home at his or her
 principal place of residence during an uninterrupted timeframe. An absence of
 residence greater than six months is presumed to disrupt the continuity of
 residence.

 (19) "Residing in the
 home for at least one or two years" means one is domiciled in the principal
 place of residence.

 (20) "State
 Plan" means all documentation submitted by the Commissioner, on behalf of the
 Department, to and for approval by the Secretary of Health and Human Services
 pursuant to Title XIX of the federal Social Security Act of 1935, as
 amended.

 Notes

 Ga. Comp. R.
 & Regs. R. 111-3-8-.02 

 O.C.G.A. §
 49-4-147.1 . 

 Original Rule
 entitled "Definitions" adopted. F. July 16,
 2004 ; eff. August 5,
 2004 . 
 Amended: F. Aug. 17,
 2004 ; eff. Sept. 6,
 2004 . 
 Amended: F. Oct. 19,
 2006 ; eff. Nov. 8,
 2006 . 
 Amended: F. Mar. 27,
 2020 ; eff. Apr. 16,
 2020 . 

 State regulations are updated quarterly; we currently have two versions available.
 Below is a comparison between our most recent version and the prior quarterly release. 
 More comparison features will be added as we have more versions to compare.

 No prior version found.

 State Regulations Toolbox

 Accessibility 

 About LII 

 Contact us 

 Advertise here 

 Help 

 Terms of use 

 Privacy
