Source URL: https://www.law.cornell.edu/regulations/georgia/Ga-Comp-R-Regs-R-111-3-8-.04
Retrieved: 2026-09-23

Ga. Comp. R. & Regs. R. 111-3-8-.04 - Recovery for Payments Made on Behalf of Medicaid-Eligible Persons | State Regulations | US Law | LII / Legal Information Institute 

 Please help us improve our site!

 × 

 No thank you 

 Skip to main content 

 Cornell Law
 School 
 Search
 Cornell 

 Toggle navigation 

 Please help
 us improve our site! 

 Support Us! 

 Search 

 About
 LII 

 Who We Are 

 What We Do 

 Who Pays For This 

 Contact Us 

 Get the
 law 

 Constitution 

 Supreme Court 

 U.S. Code 

 CFR 

 Federal Rules 

 Federal Rules of Appellate Procedure 

 Federal Rules of Civil Procedure 

 Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure 

 Federal Rules of Evidence 

 Federal Rules of Bankruptcy Procedure 

 U.C.C. 

 Law by jurisdiction 

 State law 

 Uniform laws 

 Federal law 

 World law 

 Lawyer directory 

 Legal encyclopedia 

 Business law 

 Constitutional law 

 Criminal law 

 Family law 

 Employment law 

 Money and Finances 

 More... 

 Help out 

 Give 

 Sponsor 

 Advertise 

 Create 

 Promote 

 Join Lawyer Directory 

 LII 

 State Regulations 

 Georgia Compiled Rules & Regulations 

 Department 111 - RULES OF DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNITY HEALTH 

 Chapter 111-3 - MEDICAL ASSISTANCE 

 Subject 111-3-8 - ESTATE RECOVERY 

 Ga. Comp. R. & Regs. R. 111-3-8-.04 - Recovery for Payments Made on Behalf of Medicaid-Eligible Persons

 Ga. Comp. R. & Regs. R. 111-3-8-.04 - Recovery for Payments Made on Behalf of Medicaid-Eligible Persons 

 State Regulations 

 Compare

 (1) These
 regulations shall be construed and applied to further the intent of the
 Legislature to supplement Medicaid funds that are used to provide medical
 services to eligible persons. Estate recovery shall be accomplished by the
 Department or its agent filing a statement of claim against the estate or with
 the closest identifiable surviving family members of a deceased Medicaid Member
 or any person who has an interest in property of the deceased member. Recovery
 shall be made pursuant to federal authority in § 13612 of the Omnibus Budget
 Reconciliation Act of 1993 which amends § 1917(b)(1) of the Social Security
 Act, 42 U.S.C.
 1396p(b)(1) . 

 (2) Adjustment or recovery for all medical
 assistance and/or services pursuant to the State Plan will be from Medicaid
 Members: (a) Who, at the time of death, were
 any age and an inpatient in a nursing facility, intermediate care facility for
 individuals with intellectual disability, or other medical institution if the
 Member is required, as a condition of receiving services in the facility under
 the State Plan, to spend for costs of medical care all but a minimal amount of
 the person's income required for personal needs; or

 (b) Who, at the time of death, were
 fifty-five (55) years of age or older when the Member received medical
 assistance, but only for medical services consisting of nursing facility
 services, personal care services, home and community based services, and
 hospital and prescription drug services provided to Members in nursing
 facilities or receiving home and community based services.

 (3) The Department shall provide written
 notice of the Estate Recovery program to Members at the time of application for
 medical assistance and the Members must sign a written acknowledgement of
 receipt of such notice. Notice will be given to Members thereafter at the
 annual redetermination. Members currently receiving medical assistance prior to
 the Estate Recovery program's effective date set forth in Paragraph (17) of
 this Rule will be notified at his or her annual redetermination. A notification
 by the Medicaid Eligibility Systems that the notice was sent and acknowledged
 by the Member and the Member's personal representative by U.S. mail or
 electronic means of communication for those who have elected to receive
 electronic communications to the last known address of the Member or the
 Member's personal representative shall be deemed to satisfy this notice
 requirement.

 (4) The acceptance of
 public medical assistance, as defined by Title XIX of the Social Security Act,
 including mandatory and optional supplemental payments under the Social
 Security Act, shall create a debt to the agency in the amount recoverable under
 the State Plan. The Department shall be given priority status, upon filing a
 statement of claim in the estate proceeding if an estate proceeding has been
 filed. In addition, priority status attaches to the Department's interest
 regardless whether an estate proceeding has been initiated.

 (5) The Department may amend the claim as a
 matter of right until the Member's estate has been closed.

 (6) The Department's provider processing
 reports shall be admissible as prima facie evidence in substantiating the
 agency's claim.

 (7) Any trust
 provision that denies recovery for medical assistance is void on and after the
 time of its making.

 (8) Adjustment
 or recovery of debt will be made only after the death of the Member's surviving
 spouse, if any, and only at a time when the Member has no surviving child who
 is under the age of twenty-one (21), or a child who is blind or permanently and
 totally disabled pursuant to the eligibility requirements of Title XIX of the
 Social Security Act.

 (9) With
 respect to a lien placed on the home of a permanently institutionalized Member,
 the Department will not seek adjustment or recovery of Medical assistance
 correctly paid on behalf of the Member until the following persons are not
 residing in the Member's home: (a) A sibling
 of the Member with an equity interest in the home who was residing in the
 Member's home for at least one (1) year on a continuous basis immediately
 before the date that the Member was institutionalized; and

 (b) A child of the Member who was residing in
 the Member's home for at least two (2) years on a continuous basis before the
 date that the Member was institutionalized and who has established to the
 satisfaction of the Department that he or she provided care that permitted the
 Member to reside at home rather than to become institutionalized.

 (10) The sibling or child of the
 Member must demonstrate that he or she has been lawfully residing in the
 Member's home on a continuous basis for the periods described in Paragraphs
 (9)(a) and (b) respectively, since the date of the Member's admission to the
 medical institution, and must provide the Department with clear and convincing
 evidence to prove residency which may include, but not be limited to, receipts,
 mortgage statements, bills, mail forwarded to Member's address, or voter's
 registration. The sibling or child of the Member must demonstrate that he or
 she did not reside in any other residence except the Member's home during the
 periods of time set forth in Paragraphs (9)(a) and (b) respectively. The
 sibling or child shall maintain the burden of proof in all
 proceedings.

 (11) No debt under
 this section shall be enforced against any property that is determined to be
 exempt from the claims of creditors under the constitution or laws of this
 state.

 (12) The Department may
 delay or waive recovery from an estate if doing so would cause undue hardship
 for the qualified Heirs, as defined in Rule
 111-3-8-.08 . The personal
 representative of an estate and any Heir may request that the agency waive
 recovery.

 (13) The state's right to
 full reimbursement of the costs of medical assistance shall not be diminished
 by the recovery of any judgment, settlement, or award of an amount less than
 the value of the original or settled claim. To enforce its rights, the state
 may intervene or join in any action or proceeding brought by a claimant against
 a third party. To aid in the recovery of the cost of medical assistance, the
 state shall have a first lien in the full amount of the costs of medical
 assistance against the proceeds from all damages awarded in a suit or
 settlement.

 (14) Transfers of real
 or personal property, on or after the look-back dates defined in
 42 U.S.C. §
 1396p , by a Member of such aid, or by their
 spouse, without adequate consideration are voidable and may be set aside by an
 action in court.

 (15) Counsel fees,
 costs, or other expenses shall not reduce any third party recovery obtained by
 the state incurred by the Member or the Member's attorney.

 (16) If, after the reported death of the
 Member, the Department is prohibited from Estate Recovery because of exemption
 conditions, the Department may postpone recovery until all exemption conditions
 are no longer present. An estate does not have to be open in order for the
 Department to execute its claim after all exemption conditions are no longer
 present. Termination of recovery will occur when all real and personal property
 included as part of the Member's estate is no longer accessible due to all
 estate property having been depleted through payment of costs of medical care
 for the Member and the Member's spouse.

 (17) The effective date of the Medicaid
 Estate Recovery Program is May 3, 2006. Adjustment or recovery shall apply to
 those costs associated with medical assistance and/or services a Member
 received on or after the effective date.

 (18) To prevent substantial and unreasonable
 hardship, the Commissioner shall waive any claim against the first $25,000.00
 of any estate subject to an Estate Recovery claim for the deceased Medicaid
 Member with a date of death on or after July 1, 2018.

 Notes

 Ga. Comp. R.
 & Regs. R. 111-3-8-.04 

 O.C.G.A. §
 49-4-147.1 ,
 42 U.S.C.
 1396p . 

 Original Rule
 entitled "Recovery for Payments Made on Behalf of Medicaid-Eligible Persons"
 adopted. F. July 16, 2004 ; eff.
 August 5,
 2004 . 
 Amended: F. Aug. 17,
 2004 ; eff. Sept. 6,
 2004 . 
 Amended: F. Oct. 19,
 2006 ; eff. Nov. 8,
 2006 . 
 Amended: F. Mar. 27,
 2020 ; eff. Apr. 16,
 2020 . 

 State regulations are updated quarterly; we currently have two versions available.
 Below is a comparison between our most recent version and the prior quarterly release. 
 More comparison features will be added as we have more versions to compare.

 No prior version found.

 State Regulations Toolbox

 Accessibility 

 About LII 

 Contact us 

 Advertise here 

 Help 

 Terms of use 

 Privacy
