Source URL: https://codes.findlaw.com/ga/title-49-social-services/ga-code-sect-49-4-147-1/
Retrieved: 2026-09-23

Georgia Code Title 49. Social Services § 49-4-147.1 | FindLaw 

 Skip to main content 

 Find a Lawyer 

 Find a Lawyer

 Legal Forms & Services

 Learn About the Law

 Learn About the Law

 Explore Legal Topics 

 Search Laws by State 

 Search Case Law 

 Search U.S. Codes 

 Legal Professionals

 Legal Professionals

 Legal Professional Resources 

 Law Firm Marketing 

 Blogs

 Find a Lawyer

 Search Legal Topics

 Begin typing to search, use arrow keys to navigate, use enter to select

 Legal Issue 

 More Options 

 Name Search

 Browse Legal Issues

 Browse Law Firms

 Support

 City, ZIP Code or County 

 Enter either your legal issue or location to continue

 Find a Lawyer 

 Search by Legal Topic

 Enter legal topic 

 Get the Information 

 CODES / 
 Georgia / 
 Title 49. Social Services / 
 § 49-4-147-1 

 Georgia Code Title 49. Social Services § 49-4-147.1

 Current as of March 28, 2024 | Updated by Findlaw Staff 

 (a) In accordance with applicable federal law and regulations, including those under
 Title XIX of the federal Social Security Act,  1 the department may make claim against the estate of a Medicaid recipient for the
 amount of any medical assistance payments made on such person's behalf by the department. A claim shall be made against the estate of a deceased Medicaid recipient only if
 at the time of application for medical assistance the applicant received written notice
 that the medical assistance costs could be recovered from the applicant's estate and
 the applicant signed a written acknowledgment of receipt of such notice, the estate
 is otherwise subject to recovery, and if no hardship or other exemption exists. The commissioner shall waive such claim if he or she determines enforcement of the
 claim would result in substantial and unreasonable hardship to dependents of the individual
 against whose estate the claim exists.

 (b) The estate recovery program established pursuant to this Code section shall not
 be effective any earlier than May 3, 2006. In no event shall the department make claims against the estate of a Medicaid recipient
 for the amount of any medical assistance payments made on such person's behalf prior
 to May 3, 2006.

 (c) The commissioner shall delay execution of a claim against the estate where the
 dependents or heirs agree to pay the full amount of the claim in reasonable installments.

 (d) To prevent substantial and unreasonable hardship, the commissioner shall waive
 any claim against the first $25,000.00 of any estate. No later than July 1, 2018, the department shall submit to the United States Department
 of Health and Human Services Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services an amendment
 to the state plan reflecting the provisions of this subsection. In the event that such amendment to the state plan is not approved, this subsection
 shall stand repealed in its entirety.

 1

 42 U.S.C.A. § 1396 et seq.

 Previous Part of Code 

 Next Part of Code 

 Back to Chapter List 

 Copy 

 Cite this article: FindLaw.com - Georgia Code Title 49. Social Services § 49-4-147.1 - last updated March 28, 2024  |
 https://codes.findlaw.com/ga/title-49-social-services/ga-code-sect-49-4-147-1/ 

 FindLaw Codes may not reflect the most recent version of the law in your jurisdiction. Please verify the status of the code you are researching with the state legislature before relying on it for your legal needs.

 Was this helpful? 

 Yes 

 No 

 Easy to understand 

 Solved my problem 

 Other 

 Missing the information I need 

 Too complicated / too many steps 

 Out of date 

 Other 

 Submit 

 Cancel 

 Search all Georgia Codes

 Keyword or Citation (Required)

 View Results 

 Welcome to FindLaw's Cases & Codes

 A free source of state and federal court opinions, state laws, and the United States Code. For more information about the legal concepts addressed by these cases and statutes, visit FindLaw’s Learn About the Law.

 Go to Learn About the Law 

 Did FindLaw Help You Understand This Legal Issue?

 Make It a Preferred Google Search Source

 Add to Google 

 Latest Blog Posts

 SEC Opens Door for Crypto-Style Trading of U.S. Stocks 

 A Third of Americans Can’t Name the Three Branches of Government. Here’s Why That Affects Your Rights. 

 Contract Buzz: Sixth Circuit Reversal Highlights Difficulty in Litigation Involving Cannabis 

 New Study: High Rates of Depression, Burnout Continue Among Attorneys 

 Explore all 

 For Legal Professionals

 Practice Management 

 Corporate Counsel 

 Legal Technology 

 Law Students 

 Learn About The Law

 Get help with your legal needs

 FindLaw’s Learn About the Law features thousands of informational articles to help you understand your options. And if you’re ready to hire an attorney,  find one in your area  who can help.

 Go to Learn About the Law 

 Need to Find an Attorney?

 Search our directory by legal issue

 Enter information in one or both fields (Required)

 Legal Issue

 More Options 

 Name Search 

 Browse Legal Issues 

 Browse Law Firms 

 Support 

 City, ZIP Code or County 

 Enter either your legal issue or location to continue 

 Find a Lawyer 

 Copied to clipboard

 Back to Top 

 Questions?

 At FindLaw.com, we pride ourselves on being the number one source of
 free legal information and resources on the web. 

 Contact us.

 Stay up-to-date with how the law affects your life. 

 Sign up for our consumer newsletter.

 ENTER YOUR EMAIL ADDRESS (Required)

 Thank you for subscribing!

 follow us: 

 ABOUT US 

 Our Team 

 Accessibility 

 Contact Us 

 FIND A LAWYER 

 By Location 

 By Legal Issue 

 By Lawyer Profiles 

 By Name 

 SELF-HELP RESOURCES 

 Legal Forms & Services 

 LEGAL RESEARCH 

 Learn About the Law 

 State Laws 

 U.S. Caselaw 

 U.S. Codes 

 LEGAL NETWORK 

 FindLaw.com : Free, trusted legal information for consumers and legal professionals 

 SuperLawyers.com : Directory of U.S. attorneys with the exclusive Super Lawyers rating 

 Abogado.com : The #1 Spanish-language legal website for consumers 

 LawInfo.com : Nationwide attorney directory and legal consumer resources 

 Copyright © 2026, FindLaw. All rights reserved.

 Terms 

 Privacy 

 Disclaimer 

 Cookies 

 Manage Preferences 

 Skip to main content
