Source URL: https://gov.georgia.gov/press-releases/2024-04-30/gov-kemp-signs-legislation-supporting-georgias-agriculture-industry
Retrieved: 2026-09-23

Gov. Kemp Signs Legislation Supporting Georgia's Agriculture Industry | Governor Brian P. Kemp Office of the Governor 

 Skip to main content

 An official website of the State of Georgia. 

 How you know

 Language icon 

 English 

 Organizations

 The .gov means it’s official.

 Local, state, and federal government websites often end in .gov. State of Georgia government websites and email systems use “georgia.gov” or “ga.gov” at the end of the address. Before sharing sensitive or personal information, make sure you’re on an official state website.

 Still not sure?

 Call 1-800-GEORGIA to verify that a website is an official website of the State of Georgia.

 Loading… 

 Georgia.gov logo 

 Governor Brian P. Kemp
 Office of the Governor

 Search 

 Close 

 Menu 

 Main navigation

 Governor 

 Subnavigation toggle for Governor 

 About Governor Brian P. Kemp 

 Administration 

 Initiatives and Priorities 

 Governor's Internship Program 

 FAQs 

 First Lady 

 Subnavigation toggle for First Lady 

 GRACE Commission 

 News 

 Subnavigation toggle for News 

 Press Releases 

 Photo Gallery 

 Social Media 

 Executive Action 

 Subnavigation toggle for Executive Action 

 Executive Orders 

 Legislation 

 Appointments 

 Proclamations 

 Mansion 

 Subnavigation toggle for Mansion 

 History 

 Tour the Governor's Mansion 

 In the Kitchen 

 Friends of the Mansion 

 Favorite Links 

 Annual Events at the Mansion 

 Events 

 Contact Us 

 Subnavigation toggle for Contact Us 

 Proclamations 

 Commendation Request 

 Greetings Letter Request 

 Capitol Information & Directions 

 Open Records Request 

 Scheduling Requests for the Governor 

 Scheduling Requests for the First Lady 

 Header Utility Narrow

 Search this site

 Enter your keywords 

 Popular searches

 Mission Statement 

 Organization of the office 

 History 

 Meeting Requests 

 Key Staff 

 Duties of the Office 

 Event Requests 

 Contact 

 Breadcrumb

 Home 

 News 

 Press Releases 

 Gov. Kemp Signs Legislation Supporting Georgia's Agriculture Industry

 News

 Press Releases 

 Subnavigation toggle for Press Releases 

 2026 Press Releases 

 2025 Press Releases 

 2024 Press Releases 

 2023 Press Releases 

 2022 Press Releases 

 2021 Press Releases 

 2020 Press Releases 

 2019 Press Releases 

 Photo Gallery 

 Social Media 

 April 30, 2024

 Gov. Kemp Signs Legislation Supporting Georgia's Agriculture Industry

 Valdosta, GA  - Governor Brian P. Kemp, accompanied by First Lady Marty Kemp, Lieutenant Burt Jones, Speaker Jon Burns, Commissioner Tyler Harper, members of the General Assembly, and other state and local leaders, signed a package of legislation focused on supporting Georgia's ever growing agricultural industry and improving security against foreign adversaries.

 Among other things, included in this package is legislation that tackles ownership of agricultural land or land near military installations by certain individuals acting as an agent of a foreign adversary, alleviates high input costs for our farmers and ranchers, protects children from misleading and dangerous marketing, and increases the penalty for livestock theft.

 "As valued members of our state's number one industry, Georgia's farming families deserve our enduring support as they face unprecedented challenges, including having to navigate disastrous federal energy policies, attempts by foreign adversaries to acquire farm land, and theft of property,”  said Governor Brian Kemp . “We are tackling these challenges head on, and I want to thank our legislative partners for their work on these important issues."

 While the package is primarily focused on agriculture-related issues, it also addresses career burnout among healthcare professionals and goes after those who are distributing fentanyl-laced medications or controlled substances.

 Governor Kemp signed nine pieces of legislation included below: 

 SB 420 , sponsored by  Senator Jason Anavitarte , signed by  Senators Russ Goodman, Bill Cowsert, and Steve Gooch , carried in the House by  Representative Clay Pirkle , and advocated for by  Commissioner Tyler Harper , prohibits the ownership or acquisition of agricultural land or non-residential land within a radius of a military location by a nonresident alien acting as an agent of a government designated as a foreign adversary, entity domiciled/majorly owned in certain countries, or governments of countries designated as a foreign adversary by the U.S. Secretary of Commerce.

 SB 340 , sponsored by  Senator Kay Kirkpatrick  and carried in the House by  Representative Joe Campbell , adds diesel exhaust fluid (for agricultural uses only) to the Georgia Agricultural Tax Exemption (GATE) - alleviating high input costs for our farmers and ranchers.

 HB 827 , sponsored by  Representative Tyler Paul Smith , signed by  Representatives Robert Dickey, Clay Pirkle, Rob Leverett, and Leesa Hagan , and carried in the Senate by  Senator Russ Goodman , increases the penalty for livestock theft and awards Title 16 law enforcement authority to the Georgia Department of Agriculture (GDA) and includes language from HB 1164 relating to criminal trespass involving a wild animal that is contained in a cage, enclosure, etc.

 SB 494 , sponsored by  Senator Sam Watson , signed by  Senators Randy Robertson, Kay Kirkpatrick, Russ Goodman, and Freddie Powell Sims , carried in the House by  Representative John Corbett , and advocated by  Commissioner Tyler Harper , makes changes to the framework for hemp regulation in Georgia to allow the Georgia Department of Agriculture (GDA) to have greater oversight and enforcement power and adds labeling, packaging, and marketing requirements to protect children from misleading and dangerous marketing.

 SB 436 , sponsored by  Senator Sam Watson , signed by  Senators Russ Goodman, Lee Anderson, Larry Walker, and Frank Ginn , and carried in the House by  Representative Chas Cannon , expands the use of farm-use vehicles.

 HB 455 , sponsored by  Representative John LaHood , signed by  Representatives Sharon Cooper, Mark Newton, Deborah Silcox, and Tremaine Teddy Reese , and carried in the Senate by  Senator John Albers , requires that professional programs established to address career fatigue and wellness in healthcare professionals are not obligated to report information on individual cases to the respective licensing boards unless they are determined to not be competent to continue to practice or are a danger to themselves or others.

 HB 1335 , sponsored by  Representative John LaHood , signed by  Representatives Trey Rhodes, Noel Williams, Houston Gaines, and Dale Washburn , and carried in the Senate by  Senator Ben Watson , adjusts staffing requirements in personal care homes, assisted living communities, and memory care centers by ensuring that no fewer than two on-site direct care staff are present on the premise at all times with at least one staff person on each floor. If the personal care home has implemented a medical alert system and each resident is provided a wearable device that connects to such system, then the staff person may move about the premises as necessary.

 HB 906 , sponsored by  Representative Bill Yearta , signed by  Representatives Penny Houston and Clay Pirkle , and carried in the Senate by  Senator Carden Summers , provides for an additional superior court judge to the Tifton Judicial Circuit to be appointed by the Governor for a term beginning July 1, 2024, through December 31, 2025. The position will then become elected.

 Named after Austin Walters,  SB 465 , sponsored by  Senator Russ Goodman , signed by  Senators Bo Hatchett, Blake Tillery, Larry Walker, and Lee Anderson , carried in the House by  Representative James Burchett , and advocated by the  Walters Family and O'Kelley Family , targets those involved in distributing fentanyl-laced medications to unknowing consumers by creating the offense of aggravated involuntary manslaughter for persons who manufacture or sell an apparent controlled substance that contains fentanyl and cause the fentanyl overdose death of another. The bill also establishes a criminal penalty for unregulated persons to possess a pill press, tableting machine, encapsulating machine, or other materials used to manufacture controlled or counterfeit substances.

 Governor Kemp extends his appreciation to all of those whose diligent work and efforts led to him being able to sign these bills today.

 Contact

 Press Secretary 
 Garrison Douglas 

 [email protected] 

 Contact

 Deputy Press Secretary 
 Carter Chapman 

 [email protected] 

 Georgia.gov logo 

 Governor Brian P. Kemp
 Office of the Governor 

 Facebook page for Governor Brian P. Kemp Office of the Governor

 X (Twitter) page for Governor Brian P. Kemp Office of the Governor

 Instagram page for Governor Brian P. Kemp Office of the Governor

 How can we help?

 Call Us

 Primary: (404) 656-1776 

 Constituent Services

 Online Form 

 Visit

 206 Washington Street 111 State Capitol 
Atlanta, GA 30334 US

 Capitol Information and Directions 

 Mail

 206 Washington Street Suite 203, State Capitol 
Atlanta, GA 30334 US

 Hours

 Eastern Time Zone

 About Us

 Frequently Asked Questions

 Press Releases

 Staff Directory

 Governor in Action

 Executive Orders

 Proclamations

 Signed Legislation

 © Georgia.gov 

 Accessibility 

 Privacy/Security 

 Website powered by GovHub 

 Human Trafficking Notice 

 Georgia Web Analytics
