Source URL: https://data.capitol.hawaii.gov/hrscurrent/Vol12_Ch0501-0588/HRS0560/HRS_0560-0001-0201.htm
Retrieved: 2026-09-23

﻿ 

 PART 2 

 PART 2.  
DEFINITIONS 

      §560:1-201  General definitions.   
Subject to additional definitions contained in the subsequent articles that are 
applicable to specific articles, parts, or sections, and unless the context 
otherwise requires, in this chapter:

      "Agent" includes an attorney-in-fact 
under a durable or nondurable power of attorney, an individual authorized to 
make decisions concerning another's health care, and an individual authorized 
to make decisions for another under a natural death act.

      "Application" means a written request 
to the registrar for an order of informal probate or appointment under part 3 
of article III.

      "Assisted reproduction" means a 
method of causing pregnancy other than sexual intercourse.

      "Beneficiary", 
as it relates to a : 

      (1)  "Beneficiary designated in a governing 
instrument", means a:

           (A)  Grantee of a deed;

           (B)  Devisee;

           (C)  Trust beneficiary;

           (D)  Beneficiary of a beneficiary designation;

           (E)  Donee, appointee, or taker in default of 
a power of appointment; or

           (F)  Person in whose favor a power of attorney 
or a power held in any individual, fiduciary, or representative capacity is 
exercised;

      (2)  "Beneficiary of a beneficiary 
designation", means a beneficiary of:

           (A)  An insurance or annuity policy;

           (B)  An account with POD designation;

           (C)  A security registered in beneficiary form 
(TOD);

           (D)  A transfer on death deed;

           (E)  A pension, profit-sharing, retirement, or 
similar benefit plan; or

           (F)  Any other nonprobate transfer at death;

      (3)  "Charitable trust", means any person 
entitled to enforce the trust; and

      (4)  "Trust beneficiary", means:

           (A)  A person who has any present or future 
interest, vested or contingent; or

           (B)  The owner of an interest by assignment or 
other transfer.

      "Beneficiary designation" refers to a 
governing instrument naming a beneficiary of an insurance or annuity policy, of 
an account with POD designation, of a security registered in beneficiary form 
(TOD), or of a pension, profit-sharing, retirement, or similar benefit plan, or 
other nonprobate transfer at death.

      "Child" includes an individual 
entitled to take as a child under this chapter by intestate succession from the 
parent whose relationship is involved and excludes a person who is only a 
stepchild, a foster child, a grandchild, or any more remote descendant.

      "Claims", in respect to estates of 
decedents and protected persons, includes liabilities of the decedent or 
protected person, whether arising in contract, in tort, or otherwise, and 
liabilities of the estate which arise at or after the death of the decedent or 
after the appointment of a conservator, including funeral expenses and expenses 
of administration.  The term does not include estate or inheritance taxes, or 
demands or disputes regarding title of a decedent or protected  person to specific 
assets alleged to be included in the estate.

      "Court" means the circuit court in 
this State having jurisdiction in matters relating to the affairs of decedents.

      "Conservator" shall have the meaning 
provided in section 560:5-102.

      "Descendant" of an individual means 
all of the individual's descendants of all generations, with the relationship 
of parent and child at each generation being determined by the definition of 
child and parent contained in this chapter.

      "Devise", when used as a noun, means 
a testamentary disposition of real or personal property and, when used as a 
verb, means to dispose of real or personal property by will.

      "Devisee" means a person designated 
in a will to receive a devise.  For the purposes of article II, in the case of 
a devise to an existing trust or trustee, or to a trustee on trust described by 
will, the trust or trustee is the devisee and the beneficiaries are not 
devisees.

      "Distributee" means any person who 
has received property of a decedent from the decedent's personal representative 
other than as a creditor or purchaser.  A testamentary trustee is a distributee 
only to the extent of distributed assets or increment thereto remaining in the 
trustee's hands.  A beneficiary of a testamentary trust to whom the trustee has 
distributed property received from a personal representative is a distributee 
of the personal representative.  For the purposes of this provision, 
"testamentary trustee" includes a trustee to whom assets are 
transferred by will, to the extent of the devised assets.

      "Estate" includes the property of the 
decedent, trust, or other person whose affairs are subject to this chapter as 
originally constituted and as it exists from time to time during 
administration.

      "Exempt property" means that property 
of a decedent's estate which is described in section 560:2-403.

      "Fiduciary" includes a personal 
representative, guardian, conservator, and trustee.

      "Foreign personal representative" 
means a personal representative appointed by another jurisdiction.

      "Formal proceedings" means 
proceedings conducted before a judge with notice to interested persons.

      "Governing instrument" means a deed, 
will, trust, insurance or annuity policy, account with POD designation, 
security registered in beneficiary form (TOD), pension, profit-sharing, 
retirement, or similar benefit plan, instrument creating or exercising a power 
of appointment or a power of attorney, or a dispositive, appointive, or 
nominative instrument of any similar type.

      "Guardian" shall have the meaning 
provided in section 560:5-102.

      "Heirs", except as controlled by 
section 560:2-711, means persons, including the surviving spouse or reciprocal 
beneficiary and the State, who are entitled under the statutes of intestate 
succession to the property of a decedent.

      "Incapacitated person" shall have the 
meaning provided in section 560:5-102.

      "Informal proceedings" means those 
conducted without notice to interested persons by an officer of the court 
acting as a registrar for probate of a will or appointment of a personal 
representative.

      "Interested person" includes heirs, 
devisees, children, spouses or reciprocal beneficiaries, creditors, 
beneficiaries, and any others having a property right in or claim against a 
trust estate or the estate of a decedent, ward, or protected person.  It also 
includes persons having priority for appointment as personal representative, 
and other fiduciaries representing interested persons.  The meaning as it 
relates to particular persons may vary from time to time and must be determined 
according to the particular purposes of, and matter involved in, any 
proceeding.

      "Issue" 
of an individual means descendant as defined in this section.

      "Joint tenants with the right of 
survivorship" and "community property with the right of 
survivorship" includes tenancies by the entirety and co-ownership of 
property held under circumstances that entitle one or more owners to the whole 
of the property on the death of the other or others, but excludes forms of 
co-ownership registration in which the underlying ownership of each party is in 
proportion to that party's contribution.

      "Lease" includes an oil, gas, or 
other mineral lease.

      "Letters" includes letters 
testamentary, letters of  guardianship, letters of administration, and letters 
of conservatorship.  Unless otherwise provided by order of the court or 
registrar, letters testamentary and letters of administration shall only be 
effective for three years unless renewed for good cause, and such limitation 
shall be stated on the face of the letters.

      "Minor" shall have the meaning 
provided in section 560:5-102.

      "Mortgage" means any conveyance, 
agreement, or arrangement in which property is encumbered or used as security.

      "Nonresident decedent" means a 
decedent who was domiciled in another jurisdiction at the time of decedent's 
death.

      "Organization" means a corporation, 
business trust, estate, trust, partnership, joint venture, association, 
government or governmental subdivision or agency, or any other legal or 
commercial entity.

      "Parent" includes any person entitled 
to take, or who would be entitled to take if the child died without a will, as 
a parent under this chapter by intestate succession from the child whose 
relationship is in question and excludes any person who is only a stepparent, 
foster parent, or grandparent.

      "Payor" means a trustee, insurer, 
business entity, employer, government, governmental agency or subdivision, or 
any other person authorized or obligated by law or a governing instrument to 
make payments.

      "Person" means an individual or an 
organization.

      "Personal representative" includes 
executor, administrator, successor personal representative, special 
administrator, and persons who perform substantially the same function under 
the law governing their status.  "General personal representative" 
excludes special administrator.

      "Petition" means a written request to 
the court for an order after notice.

      "Probate proceeding" means a formal 
or informal proceeding to probate a will, formal or informal proceeding to 
appoint a personal representative, or formal proceeding to adjudicate 
intestacy.

      "Proceeding" includes action at law 
and suit in equity.

      "Property" includes both real and 
personal property or any interest therein and means anything that may be the 
subject of ownership.

      "Protected person" shall have the 
meaning provided in section 560:5-102.

      "Protective proceeding" means a 
proceeding held pursuant to part 4 of article V.

      "Record" means information that is 
inscribed on a tangible medium or that is stored in an electronic or other 
medium and is retrievable in perceivable form.

      "Registrar" refers to the official of 
the court designated to perform the functions of registrar as provided in 
section 560:1-307.

      "Security" includes any note, stock, 
treasury stock, bond, debenture, evidence of indebtedness, certificate of 
interest or participation in an oil, gas, or mining title or lease or in 
payments out of production under such a title or lease, collateral trust 
certificate, transferable share, voting trust certificate or, in general, any 
interest or instrument commonly known as a security, or any certificate of 
interest or participation, any temporary or interim certificate, receipt, or 
certificate of deposit for, or any warrant or right to subscribe to or 
purchase, any of the foregoing.

      "Settlement", in reference to a 
decedent's estate, includes the full process of administration, distribution, 
and closing.

      "Sign" means, with present intent to 
authenticate or adopt a record other than a will, to:

      (1)  Execute or adopt a tangible symbol; or

      (2)  Attach to or logically associate with the record 
an electronic symbol, sound, or process.

      "Special administrator" means a 
personal representative as described by sections 560:3-614 through 560:3-618.

      "State" means a state of the United 
 States, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, or any 
territory or insular possession subject to the jurisdiction of the United States.

      "Successor personal representative" 
means a personal representative, other than a special administrator, who is 
appointed to succeed a previously appointed personal representative.

      "Successors" means persons, other 
than creditors, who are entitled to property of a decedent under the decedent's 
will or this chapter.

      "Supervised administration" refers to 
the proceedings  described in article III, part 5.

      "Survive" means that an individual 
has neither predeceased an event, including the death of another individual, 
nor is deemed to have predeceased an event under section 560:2-104 or 
560:2-702.  The term includes its derivatives, such as "survives", 
"survived", "survivor", "surviving".

      "Testacy proceeding" means a 
proceeding to establish a will or determine intestacy.

      "Testator" includes an individual of 
either sex.

      "Trust" includes an express trust, 
private or charitable, with additions thereto, wherever and however created.  
The term also includes a trust created or determined by judgment or decree 
under which the trust is to be administered in the manner of an express trust.  
The term excludes other constructive trusts and excludes resulting trusts, 
conservatorships, personal representatives, trust accounts as defined in 
article VI, custodial arrangements pursuant to chapters 553A and 554B, business 
trusts providing for certificates to be issued to beneficiaries, common trust 
funds, voting trusts, security arrangements, liquidation trusts, and trusts for 
the primary purpose of paying debts, dividends, interest, salaries, wages, 
profits, pensions, or employee benefits of any kind, and any arrangement under 
which a person is nominee or escrowee for another.

      "Trustee" includes an original, 
additional, or successor trustee, whether or not appointed or confirmed by 
court.

      "Ward" shall have the meaning 
provided in section 560:5-102.

      "Will" includes codicil and any 
testamentary instrument that merely appoints an executor, revokes or revises 
another will, nominates a guardian, or expressly excludes or limits the right 
of an individual or class to succeed to property of the decedent passing by 
intestate succession. [L 1996, c 288, pt of §1; am L 1997, c 383, §19; am L 
2004, c 161, §25; am L 2023, c 158, §6]

 Case Notes

   Appellant was not an "interested person", as 
defined in this section, who could petition the court under §560:3-614 for 
appointment as special administrator where appellant had no familial 
relationship to decedent's family, did not have a property right or claim 
against decedent's estate, and did not have priority under §560:3-203 to be 
appointed as personal representative of decedent's estate; circuit court thus 
properly denied appellant's petition.  88 H. 148, 963 P.2d 1124 (1998).

   The term "interested person" as defined in this 
section does not include a party interested solely in challenging a closure 
order in a probate proceeding; where appellants did not "possess an 
interest in the estate itself" nor were trustees, heirs, devisees, 
children, spouses or reciprocal beneficiaries, creditors, or beneficiaries, 
trial court correctly denied appellant media's petition to intervene as 
"interested persons".  106 H. 453, 106 P.3d 1096 (2005).

   Current income beneficiary of trust lacked standing to 
participate in matter concerning the distribution of the corpus upon 
termination of the trust where income beneficiary did not have any interest in 
the estate that would be affected by the particular probate proceeding inasmuch 
as income beneficiary was merely a measuring life and not a residuary 
beneficiary, and income beneficiary's interest was not a property right in or 
claim against the estate.  109 H. 502, 128 P.3d 815 (2006).

   A nonjudicial mortgage foreclosure conducted pursuant to 
§667-5, which was repealed in 2012, is not a "proceeding to enforce a 
mortgage" under §560:3-803(d)(1), as further defined by this section.  
Therefore, a nonjudicial foreclosure conducted pursuant to §667-5 is not exempt 
from the time limits under §560:3-803 for presentation of claims against a 
decedent's estate.  139 H. 167, 384 P.3d 1268 (2016).

 Previous 

 Vol12_Ch0501-0588 

 Next
