Source URL: https://data.capitol.hawaii.gov/hrscurrent/Vol07_Ch0346-0398/HRS0346/HRS_0346-0037.htm
Retrieved: 2026-09-23

﻿ 

      §346-37  Recovery of payments and costs of 
medical assistance.   (a)  If a recipient under this chapter dies leaving an 
estate and does not have a surviving spouse, child, father, mother, 
grandfather, grandmother, grandchild, stepfather, stepmother, or any designated 
heir, the department shall have a valid claim against the estate for the amount 
of social services overpayments, financial assistance overpayments, or burial 
payments granted.  The department shall file a claim against the estate of a 
deceased recipient of medical assistance for the amount of medical assistance 
granted, only if the recipient was age fifty-five or over when such medical 
assistance was received and there is no surviving spouse, or surviving child 
who is under twenty-one years of age, or blind, or disabled.  The department 
shall file a claim against the estate of a recipient of medical assistance who 
was an inpatient in a nursing facility, intermediate care facility for individuals 
with intellectual disabilities, or other medical institution only if there is 
no surviving spouse or surviving child who is under twenty-one years of age, or 
blind, or disabled.

      (b)  If any portion of any public assistance, 
including medical assistance, food stamps, or burial payment, was obtained by 
any fraudulent device, including but not limited to those under section 346-34, 
or if any public assistance, including medical assistance, food stamps, or 
burial payment, was furnished or provided after receipt of income or resources 
which were not reported to the department as required by this chapter or by the 
department, the department may file a claim against the estate of the deceased 
recipient notwithstanding subsection (a).

      (c)  If the department has provided medical 
assistance or burial payment to a person who was injured, suffered a disease, 
or died under circumstances creating a tort or other liability or payment 
obligation against a third person, the department shall have a right to recover 
from the third person an amount not to exceed the full amount of the costs of 
medical assistance or burial payment furnished or to be furnished by the 
department.

      (d)  The department, as to this right of 
reimbursement, shall also be subrogated to all rights or claims that a claimant 
has against the third person for medical assistance and burial payments not to 
exceed the full extent of the costs of medical assistance or burial payment 
furnished or to be furnished by the department.

      To enforce its rights, the department may 
intervene or join in any action or proceeding brought by a claimant against the 
third person.  If the action or proceeding is not commenced within six months 
after the first day on which medical assistance or burial payment is furnished 
by the department in connection with the injury, disease, or death involved, 
the department may institute and prosecute legal proceedings against the third 
person for the injury, disease, or death, in a state court, either alone (in 
its own name or in the name of a claimant) or in conjunction with the claimant.

      (e)  An attorney representing a claimant or 
third person shall make reasonable inquiry as to whether the claimant has 
received or is receiving from the department medical assistance related to the 
incident involved in the action.  If the claimant, claimant's attorney, or 
claimant's heirs, representatives, or beneficiaries, or any third person have 
received from the department actual notice of its right to reimbursement or if 
they have reason to know that the claimant has received or is receiving from 
the department medical assistance related to the incident, then the claimant, 
claimant's attorney, claimant's heirs, representatives, or beneficiaries, or 
third person or third person's attorney shall give to the department timely 
written notice of any claim or action against a third person.  At any time 
during the pendency of any claim or action, the claimant, claimant's attorney 
if represented, claimant's heirs, representatives, or beneficiaries, or third 
person or third person's attorney may contact the department to ascertain the 
full amount of the costs of medical assistance or burial payment made, which 
information shall be provided in a reasonable time by the department.  
Upon obtaining a judgment or reaching a settlement through negotiation or legal 
proceedings, but before the release of any award or settlement proceeds to any 
person:

      (1)  The claimant's attorney or third person or third 
person's attorney, if the attorney has received actual notice from the 
department of a lien or if the attorney or third person has reason to know that 
a lien exists; or

      (2)  The claimant or the claimant's heirs, 
representatives, or beneficiaries, if not represented by an attorney who has 
received actual notice of the lien,

 shall notify the department immediately in order to 
ascertain and satisfy the department's right to reimbursement for costs of 
medical assistance or burial payment made.

      (f)  If liability is found to exist, or if the 
issue of third-party liability is settled or compromised without a finding of 
liability, regardless of who institutes legal proceedings or seeks other means 
of recovering, the department shall have a right to recover up to the full 
amount of the costs of medical assistance or burial payment made from a 
settlement, award, or judgment.  To aid in the recovery of the costs, the 
department shall have a first lien for up to the full amount of the costs of 
medical assistance or burial payment made against the proceeds from damages 
recovered in a settlement, award, or judgment.  The lien shall attach as 
provided by subsection (g).

      (g)  The lien of the department for 
reimbursement of costs of medical assistance or burial payments under 
subsection (f), shall attach by a written notice of lien served upon the 
claimant's attorney or upon the third person, the third person's agent, attorney, 
or insurance company.  The method of service shall be by certified or 
registered mail, return receipt requested, or by delivery of the notice of lien 
personally to these individuals.  Service by certified or registered mail is 
complete upon receipt.  The notice of lien shall state the name of the injured, 
diseased, or deceased person, the amount of the lien, and the date of the 
accident or incident that caused the injuries, disease, or death that 
necessitated the department's medical assistance or burial payments.  If the 
notice of lien is served upon the claimant's attorney, the notice of lien shall 
state that the claimant's attorney shall pay the lien from the proceeds of any 
judgment, settlement, or compromise based on the incident or accident as provided 
in this section.  If the notice of lien is served upon the third person, 
or the third person's agent, attorney, or insurance company, the notice of lien 
shall state that the third person shall pay the lien as provided in this 
section prior to disbursing any of the proceeds to the claimant or to the 
claimant's attorney.  A notice of lien may be amended from time to time until 
extinguished, each amendment taking effect upon proper service.  

      When restitution is sought in a criminal 
proceeding from a third person who has caused injury to a recipient of medical 
assistance, a written notice of lien and an itemized list of payments made by 
the department that identifies the provider of services, the dates of services, 
the amounts billed and paid, and the dates of payments, shall be provided to 
the court and to the person against whom restitution is sought.  Absent a good 
faith basis contesting the amount or validity of a specific line item charge or 
charges in the lien, the entire lien amount shall be presumed valid by the 
court in determining the amount of restitution pursuant to section 706-646.

      (h)  The lien shall attach as provided by 
subsection (g).  If a notice of lien is properly served upon the attorney 
representing the claimant as provided in subsection (g), that attorney shall 
pay the lien as provided in this section prior to disbursing any of the 
proceeds of the suit or settlement to the attorney's client.  If a notice of 
lien is properly served upon the third person, the third person's agent or 
attorney, or the third person's insurance company, as provided in subsection 
(g), it shall be the responsibility of the person receiving the notices to pay 
the lien as provided in this section prior to disbursing any of the proceeds to 
the claimant's attorney.  The lien shall be satisfied from that portion of the 
settlement, award, or judgment allocated or allocable to payments by the 
department for medical assistance and burial payments.  Any allocation by a 
judge, jury, arbitrator, or similar dispute resolution person or tribunal shall 
be binding; provided that the department's medical assistance and burial 
payments are included as part of the case or claims brought by the claimant in 
any action.  Any allocation by the claimant or third party may be considered 
but is not binding on the department.  If there is no allocation, a reasonable 
allocation shall be determined by agreement, administrative hearing under 
subsection (i), or a court of competent jurisdiction.

      If, after having received timely written notice 
of any claim or action under subsection (e), the department did not intervene 
or join in the action or prosecute its own claims or actively participate with 
claimant or claimant's attorney in the prosecution of claims, or a distribution 
agreement was not entered into between the parties, reimbursement shall be as 
follows:  If the lien is less than or equal to one-third of the settlement, 
award, or judgment, and there is no allocation by a judge, jury, arbitrator, or 
similar dispute resolution person or tribunal, then there shall be a rebuttable 
presumption that the amount of reimbursement due the department is the total 
payments for medical assistance or burial payments by the department or 
one-third of the settlement, award, or judgment, whichever is less.  Any party 
challenging this rebuttable presumption shall bear the burden of proof.  The 
department's fair share of claimant's reasonable attorney's fees and expenses 
shall be deducted from the department's lien recovery.  There shall be a 
rebuttable presumption that one-third of the department's gross reimbursement 
amount plus a proportionate share of the general excise tax is a reasonable 
amount for the department's contribution towards claimant's attorney's fees and 
expenses.  Any party challenging this rebuttable presumption shall bear the 
burden of proof.

      If the department alone prosecutes claims that 
include its medical assistance or burial payments, it shall not be required to 
reduce its lien on account of attorney's fees or expenses, if any, incurred by 
the claimant or claimant's attorney.

      If the claimant's attorney and the department 
contribute to the recovery of medical assistance or burial payments made by the 
department, then the department's fair contribution toward the claimant's 
attorney's fees and costs incurred shall be a reasonable amount based solely 
upon legitimate costs and services rendered by the claimant or claimant's 
attorney in recovering the lien amount.  Any dispute regarding the department's 
determination of its contribution to claimant's attorney's fees and costs may 
be submitted to administrative hearing under subsection (i) or a court of 
competent jurisdiction.  The value of services contributed by the claimant 
and department may be considered in fairly allocating fees and costs between 
the claimant and department where both contribute to recovering the lien 
amount.

      The department's lien, after reduction for its 
contribution to claimant's attorney's fees and expenses, shall not exceed 
one-third of the settlement, award, or judgment.  Payment of one-third of the 
settlement, award, or judgment to the department and two-thirds to the claimant 
and claimant's attorney shall satisfy the entire lien if the department's lien, 
after reduction for its contribution to claimant's attorney's fees and 
expenses, exceeds one-third of the settlement, award, or judgment.  Any claimant 
who asserts that reimbursement to the department should be less than one-third 
of the settlement, award, or judgment, under the circumstances of that claim, 
shall bear the burden of proof.

      (i)  If there is a dispute between the 
claimant, the claimant's agent or the claimant's attorney, and the department 
concerning the existence of the lien or the amount of the lien, or the 
amount to be reimbursed, the claimant, the claimant's agent, or the claimant's 
attorney may submit the dispute to a court of competent jurisdiction or request 
in writing an administrative hearing on the dispute.  After receipt by the 
department of a written request, the department shall conduct an administrative 
hearing within a reasonable period of time.  Chapter 91, including any 
provisions for judicial review or appeal, shall apply to the hearing.  Funds 
sufficient to fully satisfy the reimbursement rights of the department shall be 
either retained by the person served with the notice of lien, shall be paid to 
the department, or otherwise reserved subject to agreement with the department 
pending a decision by the court or the department and any subsequent judicial 
review or appeal.

      (j)  Upon the recovery of any claim as provided 
in this section, the amount recovered shall be paid into the treasury of the 
State, and if the amount for which claim was paid was in part from federal 
funds, the proper portion thereof shall be paid by the director of finance into 
the treasury of the United States, and the director of finance shall report the 
payment to the department.

      (k)  Any person who is subject to the lien who 
fails to pay the full amount due under this section to the department for 
reimbursement of the costs of medical assistance, although able to do so from 
the proceeds of the suit or settlement, shall be personally liable to the 
department for any damage proximately caused to the department by the failure.

      (l)  No action taken by the department in 
connection with the rights under this section shall deny to the claimant the 
recovery for that portion of the claimant's damages not covered under this 
section.

      (m)  For purposes of this section:

      "Claimant" includes an injured or 
diseased person, the person's guardian, or the personal representative, estate, 
dependents, or survivors, of the deceased person.

      "Costs of medical assistance" 
furnished or to be furnished by the department includes:

      (1)  The value or cost of medical care services 
provided directly by the department;

      (2)  The amount paid by the department to a provider 
for medical care services rendered or to be rendered; and

      (3)  The value or cost of medical care services 
rendered or to be rendered by a provider that has received the equivalent of an 
insurance benefit, capitation rate, and other fee or like charge paid by the 
department or by a medical care insurer to provide for medical care services.

      "Third person" includes any person, 
business, corporation, partnership, or entity of any kind or nature, including 
employers and insurance carriers, that is potentially liable to the claimant 
for any tort, liability, payment, reimbursement, or benefit of any kind or 
nature by reason of any injury, disease, or death.

      (n)  The department may agree with a provider 
or medical care insurer for the provision of medical care services or medical 
assistance to any claimant, and the agreement may provide for the department to 
be the exclusive entity authorized to recover all costs of medical assistance 
rendered to a claimant.  The department may recover all costs through the use 
of the lien procedures established by this section.

      (o)  In third-party liability situations, the 
medical assistance program of the department shall be fully reimbursed the 
amount due under this section or funds sufficient to fully reimburse the 
department the amount due under this section shall be retained by the person 
served with the notice of lien or otherwise reserved in a manner agreeable to 
the department before the claimant receives any money from the settlement or 
award.  This section is not intended to restrict or diminish the right of the 
department to settle or compromise its reimbursement rights under this section 
for less than the full amount due or enter into any agreement with claimant, 
claimant's attorney or representative, or other party for the distribution of 
proceeds from a suit or settlement. [L 1941, c 296, pt of §1; RL 1945, §4842; 
RL 1955, §108-23; am L Sp 1959 2d, c 1, §14; am L 1963, c 114, §1; HRS §346-37; 
am L 1972, c 32, §2; am L 1975, c 137, pt of §2; am L 1980, c 206, §1; am L 
1982, c 147, §17; gen ch 1985; am L 1994, c 187, §§4, 5; am L 1997, c 201, §1; 
am L 1999, c 52, §2; am L 2001, c 50, §2; am L 2011, c 220, §11; am L 2012, c 
211, §4]

 Cross References

   Medicaid fraud unit, see §28-91.

 Case Notes

   State's lien cannot be evaded by settlement agreement between 
injured person and putative tortfeasor covering only special damages.  Validity 
and amount of subrogated claim is for court to decide.  69 H. 21, 731 P.2d 157 
(1987).

   Subsection (j) (1997) grants the State recovery of its costs 
for medical assistance from special damages and does not limit the State to 
accepting a pro rata share of claimant's recovery; a settling claimant cannot 
waive recovery of special damages, but the State is entitled to and may recover 
its medical assistance expenses from the special damages obtained.  101 H. 466, 
71 P.3d 417 (2003).

   The clear and unambiguous language of this section (1997), 
establishes a priority that the medical assistance lien be paid to the 
department of human services before the recipient of the medical assistance is 
reimbursed; thus, trial court erred when it reduced the amount of the 
department's statutory lien.  101 H. 473 (App.), 71 P.3d 424 (2002).

   Cited:  73 H. 403, 833 P.2d 890 (1992).

 Previous 

 Vol07_Ch0346-0398 

 Next
