Source URL: https://hhs.iowa.gov/medicaid/member-services/estate-recovery
Retrieved: 2026-09-23

Estate Recovery | Health & Human Services 

 Skip to main content

 Official State of Iowa Website 

 Agencies A-Z 
 Programs & Services 

 Health & Human Services 

 Search 

 Menu 

 Main navigation

 Assistance Programs 

 Assistance Programs sub-navigation 

 Apply for Services 

 Cash Assistance 

 Child Care Assistance 

 Family Planning Program 

 Food Assistance 

 Housing & Rent Assistance 

 Job Training 

 Medicaid & Health Coverage 

 Refugee Services 

 State Supplementary Assistance 

 Women, Infants, & Children (WIC) 

 All Assistance Programs 

 Medicaid 

 Medicaid sub-navigation 

 Apply for Medicaid 

 Program Integrity 

 Member Services 

 Plans & Programs 

 Services & Care 

 Provider Services 

 All Medicaid Programs & Services 

 About Medicaid 

 About Medicare 

 Health & Prevention 

 Health & Prevention sub-navigation 

 For Patients & Caregivers 

 Medical Cannabis 

 Report a Disease or Outbreak 

 Addiction & Substance Use Disorders 

 Animal Safety and Disease Prevention 

 Birth & Maternal Care 

 Brain & Memory Health 

 Consumable Hemp 

 Cancer 

 Child & Adolescent Health 

 Dental & Oral Health 

 Diabetes Prevention & Management 

 Disease Information 

 Environmental Health 

 Family Health 

 Family Planning & Reproductive Health 

 Food, Diet & Exercise 

 Heart Health 

 Healthcare-associated Infections 

 HIV, STI and Hepatitis 

 Violence Prevention 

 Behavioral Health Service System 

 Refugee Health 

 Tobacco Use Prevention & Control 

 Vaccines & Immunizations 

 Providers & Professionals 

 All Health & Prevention 

 Family & Community 

 Family & Community sub-navigation 

 Abuse Registry 

 Community Integration 

 Disability Services 

 Economic Opportunities 

 Flourish Magazine 

 Record Check Evaluations 

 Sunny Day Fund 

 Thrive Iowa 

 Aging & Disability Resource Center 

 Aging Services 

 Adult Protective Services 

 Child Care 

 Child Protective Services 

 Child Support 

 Court-Appointed Special Advocates (CASA) 

 Disaster Recovery 

 Early Intervention & Support 

 Family Development & Self-Sufficiency (FaDSS) 

 Fatherhood Support 

 Foster Care & Adoption 

 Marriage, Birth, or Death Certificates 

 Specialty Care Facilities 

 All Family & Community Services 

 Report Abuse & Fraud 

 Report Abuse & Fraud sub-navigation 

 Mandatory Reporter Information 

 Student Abuse Investigations 

 About 

 About sub-navigation 

 Administrative Rules 

 Mission & Vision 

 Strategic Plan 

 Advisory Groups 

 Appeal a Decision 

 Careers 

 Data & Reports 

 Funding Opportunities 

 Initiatives 

 Leadership 

 Newsroom 

 Open Records 

 PHAB Accreditation 

 Policy Manuals 

 Public Meetings 

 Agencies A-Z 
 Online Services 

 Breadcrumbs

 Home 

 Medicaid 

 Member Services 

 Estate Recovery 

 Iowa Medicaid is a government program that pays for healthcare for people with limited income and people with disabilities. If you are assigned to a managed care organization (MCO), the state pays the MCO a monthly fee, called a capitation fee. This fee pays for your medical services. 
 According to federal law, every state must have an Estate Recovery Program to pay for these services. When you receive medical benefits, including the capitation fees paid to the MCOs, and even if the plan did not pay for any services, the state of Iowa has the right to ask for money back from your estate following your death. The state will never ask for more money back than it was paid. Estate recovery laws were passed by the U.S. Congress and all 50 states.
 Estate Recovery code:
 Iowa Code Section 249A.53(2) (44.42 KB) .pdf 
 441 IAC 75.28(7) (132.4 KB) .pdf 

 Estate Recovery Forms 

 Online Referral Form

 Nursing Home Referral Form

 Bank Referral Form

 Funeral Home Form

 Testate Estate 

 Intestate Estate

 Frequently Asked Questions

 Who is impacted by Estate Recovery? 

 Estate recovery only applies to Medicaid recipients who:
 Are age 55 or older, or
 Are under age 55 and live in a medical facility and will probably not return home.

 What part of an estate can be recovered? 

 An “estate” includes all:
 Real property, such as your house, land, etc.
 Personal property, such as household goods, personal effects, cars, etc. or
 Any other asset that you own at the time of your death. This includes items you own with someone else such as property, trusts, most annuities and retained life estates.

 Can repayment be delayed? 

 Medicaid repayment can be delayed if the repayment will create a hardship for your family. HHS decides, on a case-by-case basis, who gets a hardship. Your family will receive a letter about estate recovery and repayment and will have 30 days from when the letter is received to apply for hardship.
 Hardship exists for a person applying for the waiver when:
 The total household income is less than 200% of the federal poverty level for the size of the household, and
 The total household resources are not more than $10,000, and
 Recovering the resources of the “estate” denies your family of food, clothing, shelter or medical care that might put a person’s life or health in danger.
 Medicaid repayment may be delayed if you have a spouse or a dependent child who is under age 21, blind or disabled at your death.

 What is Medicaid Estate Recovery? 

 According to federal and state law, the money that the Medicaid program pays on behalf of a Medicaid member, who was age 55 or older or in a long-term care facility, is a debt owed back to the state.
 Upon the death of the Medicaid recipient, the Medicaid program contacts heirs or files a claim against the decedent’s estate to seek reimbursement for the amount owed.

 What costs will be recovered? 

 The debt includes all payments made by the State for services or goods when the recipient was age 55 years or older or of any age and living in a long-term care facility, except for some payments made under the Medicare Cost Sharing program.
 The recovery includes the full amount of capitation payments made to a MCO, including medical and dental, even if the plan did not pay for any services.
 To view a recorded presentation and slide deck that explains Iowa's estate recovery program, to include what costs are recovered visit the public meeting archive , click on "2023" under "Town Hall Materials and review the recording link and meeting materials for "October 19, 2023."

 What part of the estate can be recovered? 

 Any assets owned by the deceased member or any interest in an asset that the member had at the moment before death are subject to recovery.
 Court costs, the cost of administrating the estate, funeral expenses, medical bills of the last illness, federal and state taxes can be paid prior to the estate recovery claim. The State’s Medicaid claim must be satisfied before any lower-class creditors or heirs receive any assets or money.

 Will Medicaid take the house? 

 No, Medicaid does not “take houses”. Medicaid is a potential claimant in the estate. Houses may need to be sold to pay the debts of an estate, regardless of whether Medicaid has a claim in an estate.

 Are there circumstances for which Medicaid would not collect its claim? 

 Waivers of the claims for spouses, disabled children, and minor children delay payment until the death of a spouse or disabled child, or until a minor child turns 21. If there are enough assets to pay the claim when it is due, then the claim must be paid in full.

 Can Estate Recovery Program waive its claim if there is a hardship? 

 Any person who receives assets from the estate can request a hardship waiver if recovery would create a hardship. The guidelines for a hardship waiver are in the Iowa Administrative Code for income, assets, and if the heir would be deprived of food, clothing, shelter or medical care such that life or health would be endangered.
 An heir’s reduced inheritance due to recovery is not considered a hardship.

 Where can I get more information about Estate Recovery? 

 Please contact Iowa's Estate Recovery program at: Phone: 877-463-7887
 Medicaid Member Services Toll Free: 800-338-8366
 Des Moines Area: 515-256-4606  | 8:00 a.m. - 5:00 p.m., Monday - Friday

 More Information
 Important Information for You and Your Family Members About the Estate Recovery Program (149.05 KB) .pdf Version Español (121.86 KB) .pdf 

 Iowa's Estate Recovery Law (258.52 KB) .pdf 
 Contact Us
 Local: (515) 246-9841 
 FAX: (515) 246-0155
 Toll-free: (888) 513-5186
 Email: [email protected] 

 Relay Iowa TTY: 1-800-735-2942

 Telephone Accessibility Assistance 

 Language Accessibility 

 Call Relay Iowa TTY

 For telephone accessibility assistance if you are deaf, hard-of-hearing, deaf-blind, or have difficulty speaking. 

 ةیبرعلا | 简体中文 | Deutsch | Français

 हिंदी | unDusdm (Karen) | 한국어 | ພາສາ

 Llame a Relay Iowa TTY 

 Teléfono de texto para personas con problemas de audición, del habla y ceguera si necesita asistencia. 

 ລາວ | Pennsylfaanisch Deitsch | Русский

 Српско-хрватски | Tagalog | ไทย | Tiếng Việt

 Secondary Navigation Menu

 Member Services 

 Find a Provider 

 Estate Recovery 

 Medical Assistance Text Messaging 

 Member Rights and Responsibilities 

 Lien Recovery 

 Consumer Choice Option (CCO) 

 Health & Human Services

 Footer Social Media Menu

 Opens in a new window. 

 Opens in a new window. 

 Opens in a new window. 

 Opens in a new window. 

 Opens in a new window. 

 Department of Health and Human Services

 Lucas Building 

 321 East 12th Street 

 Des Moines , IA 50319 

 Phone

 (800) 972-2017 

 How can we help?

 Share feedback with us 

 Footer Menu

 Footer

 About Iowa HHS 

 About HHS 

 Public Meetings & Events 

 Careers 

 Volunteer Opportunities 

 Newsroom 

 Data Breach Notifications 

 Resources 

 Data & Reports 

 Request Vital Records 

 Your Life Iowa 

 Office of the State Medical Examiner 

 Accessibility Assistance 

 Contact & Locations 

 Contact Us 

 Report a Disease or Outbreak 

 Area Agencies on Aging 

 HHS Office Locations 

 Legal 

 Accessibility 

 HIPAA 

 Nondiscrimination Policy 

 Privacy 

 Archived Documents 

 Contact Menu

 Send Feedback 

 © 2026 State of Iowa - Read our accessibility, data, privacy, and other policies .
