Source URL: https://www.law.cornell.edu/regulations/idaho/IDAPA-16.03.26.984
Retrieved: 2026-09-23

Idaho Admin. Code r. 16.03.26.984 - [Effective 7/1/2025] LIENS AND ESTATE RECOVERY: REQUIREMENTS FOR ESTATE RECOVERY | State Regulations | US Law | LII / Legal Information Institute 

 Please help us improve our site!

 × 

 No thank you 

 Skip to main content 

 Cornell Law
 School 
 Search
 Cornell 

 Toggle navigation 

 Please help
 us improve our site! 

 Support Us! 

 Search 

 About
 LII 

 Who We Are 

 What We Do 

 Who Pays For This 

 Contact Us 

 Get the
 law 

 Constitution 

 Supreme Court 

 U.S. Code 

 CFR 

 Federal Rules 

 Federal Rules of Appellate Procedure 

 Federal Rules of Civil Procedure 

 Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure 

 Federal Rules of Evidence 

 Federal Rules of Bankruptcy Procedure 

 U.C.C. 

 Law by jurisdiction 

 State law 

 Uniform laws 

 Federal law 

 World law 

 Lawyer directory 

 Legal encyclopedia 

 Business law 

 Constitutional law 

 Criminal law 

 Family law 

 Employment law 

 Money and Finances 

 More... 

 Help out 

 Give 

 Sponsor 

 Advertise 

 Create 

 Promote 

 Join Lawyer Directory 

 LII 

 State Regulations 

 Idaho Administrative Code 

 Title IDAPA 16 - Health and Welfare, Department of 

 Rule 16.03.26 - [Effective 7/1/2025] MEDICAID PLAN BENEFITS 

 Effective 7/1/2025] INVESTIGATIONS, AUDITS, AND ENFORCEMENT 

 Effective 7/1/2025] SUB AREA: LIENS AND ESTATE RECOVERY 

 Idaho Admin. Code r. 16.03.26.984 - [Effective 7/1/2025] LIENS AND ESTATE RECOVERY: REQUIREMENTS FOR ESTATE RECOVERY

 Idaho Admin. Code r. 16.03.26.984 - [Effective 7/1/2025] LIENS AND ESTATE RECOVERY: REQUIREMENTS FOR ESTATE RECOVERY 

 State Regulations 

 Compare

 01. 
 Recovery From Estate of Spouse . Recovery from the estate of the spouse of a Medicaid participant may be made as permitted in Sections 56-218 and 56-218A , Idaho Code.

 02. 
 Lien Imposed Against Estate of Deceased Participant . Liens may be imposed against the estates of deceased Medicaid participants and their spouses as permitted by Section 56-218 , Idaho Code.

 03. 
 Notice of Estate Claim . The Department will notify the authorized representative of the amount of the estate claim after the death of the participant, or after the death of the surviving spouse. The notice must include instructions for applying for an undue hardship waiver.

 04. 
 Assets in Estate Subject to Claims . Assets in the estate from which the claim can be satisfied must include all real or personal property that the deceased participant owned or in which they had an ownership interest, including the following: a. Payments to the participant under an installment contract will be included among the assets of the deceased participant. This includes an installment contract on any real or personal property to which the deceased participant had a property right. The value of a promissory note, loan or property agreement is its outstanding principal balance at the date of death of the participant. When a promissory note, loan, or property agreement is secured by a Deed of Trust, the Department may request evidence of a reasonable and just underlying debt.

 b. The deceased participant's ownership interest in another person's estate, probated or not probated, is an asset of their estate when: i. Documents show the deceased participant is an eligible devisee or donee of property of another deceased person; or

 ii. The deceased participant received income from property of another person; or

 iii. State intestacy laws award the deceased participant a share in the distribution of the property of another estate.

 c. Any trust instrument that is designed to hold or to distribute funds or property, real or personal, in which the deceased participant had a beneficial interest is an asset of the estate.

 d. Life insurance is considered an asset when it has reverted to the estate.

 e. Burial insurance is considered an asset when a funeral home is the primary beneficiary or when there are unspent funds in the burial contract. Any funds remaining after payment to the funeral home will be considered assets of the estate.

 f. Checking and savings accounts that hold and accumulate funds designated for the deceased participant are assets of the estate, including joint accounts that accumulate funds for the benefit of the participant.

 g. In a conservatorship situation, if a court order under state law specifically requires funds be made available for the care and maintenance of a participant prior to their death, absent evidence to the contrary, such funds are an asset of the deceased participant's estate, even if a court has to approve release of the funds.

 h. Shares of stocks, bonds, and mutual funds to the benefit of the deceased participant are assets of the estate.

 05. 
 Value of Estate Assets . The Department will use fair market value as the value of the estate assets.

 Notes

 Idaho Admin. Code r. 16.03.26.984 

 Effective July 1, 2025 (Temporary), Idaho Bulletin Volume 25-6, June 4, 2025 . 

 State regulations are updated quarterly; we currently have two versions available.
 Below is a comparison between our most recent version and the prior quarterly release. 
 More comparison features will be added as we have more versions to compare.

 No prior version found.

 State Regulations Toolbox

 Accessibility 

 About LII 

 Contact us 

 Advertise here 

 Help 

 Terms of use 

 Privacy
