Source URL: https://www.law.cornell.edu/regulations/idaho/IDAPA-16.03.26.985
Retrieved: 2026-09-23

Idaho Admin. Code r. 16.03.26.985 - [Effective 7/1/2025] LIENS AND ESTATE RECOVERY: LIMITATIONS AND EXCLUSIONS | State Regulations | US Law | LII / Legal Information Institute 

 Please help us improve our site!

 × 

 No thank you 

 Skip to main content 

 Cornell Law
 School 
 Search
 Cornell 

 Toggle navigation 

 Please help
 us improve our site! 

 Support Us! 

 Search 

 About
 LII 

 Who We Are 

 What We Do 

 Who Pays For This 

 Contact Us 

 Get the
 law 

 Constitution 

 Supreme Court 

 U.S. Code 

 CFR 

 Federal Rules 

 Federal Rules of Appellate Procedure 

 Federal Rules of Civil Procedure 

 Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure 

 Federal Rules of Evidence 

 Federal Rules of Bankruptcy Procedure 

 U.C.C. 

 Law by jurisdiction 

 State law 

 Uniform laws 

 Federal law 

 World law 

 Lawyer directory 

 Legal encyclopedia 

 Business law 

 Constitutional law 

 Criminal law 

 Family law 

 Employment law 

 Money and Finances 

 More... 

 Help out 

 Give 

 Sponsor 

 Advertise 

 Create 

 Promote 

 Join Lawyer Directory 

 LII 

 State Regulations 

 Idaho Administrative Code 

 Title IDAPA 16 - Health and Welfare, Department of 

 Rule 16.03.26 - [Effective 7/1/2025] MEDICAID PLAN BENEFITS 

 Effective 7/1/2025] INVESTIGATIONS, AUDITS, AND ENFORCEMENT 

 Effective 7/1/2025] SUB AREA: LIENS AND ESTATE RECOVERY 

 Idaho Admin. Code r. 16.03.26.985 - [Effective 7/1/2025] LIENS AND ESTATE RECOVERY: LIMITATIONS AND EXCLUSIONS

 Idaho Admin. Code r. 16.03.26.985 - [Effective 7/1/2025] LIENS AND ESTATE RECOVERY: LIMITATIONS AND EXCLUSIONS 

 State Regulations 

 Compare

 01. 
 Limitations on Estate Claims . Limits on the Department's claim against the assets of a deceased participant or spouse are subject to Sections 56-218 and 56-218A , Idaho Code. A claim against the estate of a spouse of a participant is limited to the value of the assets of the estate that had been, at any time after October 1, 1993, community property, or the deceased participant's share of the separate property, and jointly owned property.

 02. 
 Expenses Deducted From Estate . The following expenses may be deducted from the available assets to determine the amount available to satisfy the Department's claim: a. Funeral expenses reasonably necessary for burial or cremation services approved on a case-by-case basis at the discretion of the Department.

 b. Administrative expenses of the estate may be deducted in accordance with Section 56-218 , Idaho Code.

 03. 
 Interest on Claim . The Department's claim does not bear interest until the claim becomes recoverable. Interest on the claim accrues at the legal rate of interest.

 04. 
 Excluded Land . Restricted allotted land, owned by a deceased participant who was an enrolled member of a federally recognized American Indian tribe, or eligible for tribal membership, which cannot be sold or transferred without permission from the Indian tribe or an agency of the Federal Government, will not be subject to estate recovery.

 05. 
 Certain Life Estates . The value of a life estate owned by a Medicaid participant, or their spouse will not be subject to estate recovery if: a. Neither the Medicaid participant or their spouse ever owned the remainder interest; or

 b. The life estate was created prior to July 1, 1995.

 06. 
 Marriage Settlement Agreement or Other Such Agreement . A marriage settlement agreement or other such agreement that separates assets for a married couple does not eliminate the debt against the estate of the deceased participant or the spouse. Transfers under a marriage settlement agreement or other such agreement may be voided if not for adequate consideration.

 07. 
 Undue Hardship Exception . It is not considered undue hardship when family members anticipate or expect an inheritance or will be inconvenienced economically by the lack of an inheritance. a. An applicant for an undue hardship waiver must be family with a beneficial interest in the estate and must apply for the waiver within ninety (90) days of the death of the participant or within thirty (30) days of receiving notice of the Department's claim, whichever is later. The filing of a claim by the Department in a probate proceeding constitutes notice to all heirs.

 b. Undue hardship waivers will be considered in the following circumstances: i. The estate subject to recovery is income-producing property that provides the sole source of support for heirs; or

 ii. Payment of the Department's claim would cause heirs of the deceased participant to be eligible for public assistance; or

 iii. The Department's claim is less than five hundred dollars ($500) or the total assets of the entire estate are less than five hundred dollars ($500), excluding trust accounts or other bank accounts.

 c. Any claim may be waived or deferred by the Department, partially or fully, because of undue hardship. An undue hardship does not exist if action taken by the participant prior to their death, or by their legal representative, divested or diverted assets from the estate. The Department grants undue hardship waivers on a case-by-case basis upon review of all facts and circumstances, including any action taken to diminish assets available for estate recovery or to circumvent estate recovery.

 08. 
 Set Aside of Transfers . Transfers of real or personal property of the participant without adequate consideration are voidable and may be set aside by the district court whether the asset transfer resulted, or could have resulted, in a period of ineligibility.

 Notes

 Idaho Admin. Code r. 16.03.26.985 

 Effective July 1, 2025 (Temporary), Idaho Bulletin Volume 25-6, June 4, 2025 . 

 State regulations are updated quarterly; we currently have two versions available.
 Below is a comparison between our most recent version and the prior quarterly release. 
 More comparison features will be added as we have more versions to compare.

 No prior version found.

 State Regulations Toolbox

 Accessibility 

 About LII 

 Contact us 

 Advertise here 

 Help 

 Terms of use 

 Privacy
