Source URL: https://www.law.cornell.edu/regulations/idaho/IDAPA-16.03.26.981
Retrieved: 2026-09-23

Idaho Admin. Code r. 16.03.26.981 - [Effective 7/1/2025] LIENS AND ESTATE RECOVERY: DEFINITIONS | State Regulations | US Law | LII / Legal Information Institute 

 Please help us improve our site!

 × 

 No thank you 

 Skip to main content 

 Cornell Law
 School 
 Search
 Cornell 

 Toggle navigation 

 Please help
 us improve our site! 

 Support Us! 

 Search 

 About
 LII 

 Who We Are 

 What We Do 

 Who Pays For This 

 Contact Us 

 Get the
 law 

 Constitution 

 Supreme Court 

 U.S. Code 

 CFR 

 Federal Rules 

 Federal Rules of Appellate Procedure 

 Federal Rules of Civil Procedure 

 Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure 

 Federal Rules of Evidence 

 Federal Rules of Bankruptcy Procedure 

 U.C.C. 

 Law by jurisdiction 

 State law 

 Uniform laws 

 Federal law 

 World law 

 Lawyer directory 

 Legal encyclopedia 

 Business law 

 Constitutional law 

 Criminal law 

 Family law 

 Employment law 

 Money and Finances 

 More... 

 Help out 

 Give 

 Sponsor 

 Advertise 

 Create 

 Promote 

 Join Lawyer Directory 

 LII 

 State Regulations 

 Idaho Administrative Code 

 Title IDAPA 16 - Health and Welfare, Department of 

 Rule 16.03.26 - [Effective 7/1/2025] MEDICAID PLAN BENEFITS 

 Effective 7/1/2025] INVESTIGATIONS, AUDITS, AND ENFORCEMENT 

 Effective 7/1/2025] SUB AREA: LIENS AND ESTATE RECOVERY 

 Idaho Admin. Code r. 16.03.26.981 - [Effective 7/1/2025] LIENS AND ESTATE RECOVERY: DEFINITIONS

 Idaho Admin. Code r. 16.03.26.981 - [Effective 7/1/2025] LIENS AND ESTATE RECOVERY: DEFINITIONS 

 State Regulations 

 Compare

 01. 
 Adequate Consideration . An act, object, services, or other benefit which has a tangible and/or intrinsic value that is equivalent to or greater than the fair market value of the transferred asset.

 02. 
 Authorized Representative . The person appointed by the court as the personal representative in a probate proceeding or the person identified by the participant to receive notice and make decisions on estate matters.

 03. 
 Discharge From a Medical Institution . A medical decision made by a competent provider that the participant no longer needs nursing home care because the participant's condition has improved, or the discharge is not medically contraindicated.

 04. 
 Home . The dwelling in which the participant has an ownership interest, and which the participant occupied as their primary dwelling prior to, or subsequent to, their admission to a medical institution.

 05. 
 Institutionalized Participant . An inpatient in a NF, ICF/IID, or other medical institution, who is a Medicaid participant subject to post-eligibility treatment of income in IDAPA
 16.03.05 .

 06. 
 Lawfully Residing . Residing in a manner not contrary to or forbidden by law, and with the participant's knowledge and consent.

 07. 
 Permanently Institutionalized . An institutionalized participant of any age who the Department has determined cannot reasonably be expected to be discharged from the institution and return home. Discharge refers to a medical decision made by a competent provider that the participant is physically able to leave the institution and return to live at home.

 08. 
 Personal Property . Any property that is not real property, including cash, jewelry, household goods, tools, life insurance policies, boats, and wheeled vehicles.

 09. 
 Real Property . Any land, including buildings or immovable objects attached permanently to the land.

 10. 
 Residing in the Home on a Continuous Basis . Occupying and continuing to occupy the home as the primary residence.

 11. 
 Termination of a Lien . The release or dissolution of a lien from property.

 12. 
 Undue Hardship . Conditions that justify waiver or deferral of all or a part of the Department's claim against an estate.

 13. 
 Undue Hardship Waiver . A decision made by the Department to relinquish, limit, or defer its claim to any or all estate assets of a deceased participant based on good cause.

 Notes

 Idaho Admin. Code r. 16.03.26.981 

 Effective July 1, 2025 (Temporary), Idaho Bulletin Volume 25-6, June 4, 2025 . 

 State regulations are updated quarterly; we currently have two versions available.
 Below is a comparison between our most recent version and the prior quarterly release. 
 More comparison features will be added as we have more versions to compare.

 No prior version found.

 State Regulations Toolbox

 Accessibility 

 About LII 

 Contact us 

 Advertise here 

 Help 

 Terms of use 

 Privacy
