Source URL: https://www.law.cornell.edu/regulations/illinois/Ill-Admin-Code-tit-89-SS-102.210
Retrieved: 2026-09-23

Ill. Admin. Code tit. 89, § 102.210 - Estate Claims | State Regulations | US Law | LII / Legal Information Institute 

 Please help us improve our site!

 × 

 No thank you 

 Skip to main content 

 Cornell Law
 School 
 Search
 Cornell 

 Toggle navigation 

 Please help
 us improve our site! 

 Support Us! 

 Search 

 About
 LII 

 Who We Are 

 What We Do 

 Who Pays For This 

 Contact Us 

 Get the
 law 

 Constitution 

 Supreme Court 

 U.S. Code 

 CFR 

 Federal Rules 

 Federal Rules of Appellate Procedure 

 Federal Rules of Civil Procedure 

 Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure 

 Federal Rules of Evidence 

 Federal Rules of Bankruptcy Procedure 

 U.C.C. 

 Law by jurisdiction 

 State law 

 Uniform laws 

 Federal law 

 World law 

 Lawyer directory 

 Legal encyclopedia 

 Business law 

 Constitutional law 

 Criminal law 

 Family law 

 Employment law 

 Money and Finances 

 More... 

 Help out 

 Give 

 Sponsor 

 Advertise 

 Create 

 Promote 

 Join Lawyer Directory 

 LII 

 State Regulations 

 Illinois Administrative Code 

 Title 89 - SOCIAL SERVICES 

 Ill. Admin. Code tit. 89, pt. 102 - RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES 

 Ill. Admin. Code tit. 89, § 102.210 - Estate Claims

 Ill. Admin. Code tit. 89, § 102.210 - Estate Claims 

 State Regulations 

 Compare

 a) Definitions
 in this Section are as follows: 1) "Estate" -
 all real and personal property within an individual's estate as provided in the
 Probate Act of 1975 [ 755 ILCS 5 ]. For a decedent who received benefits under
 a qualified long term care insurance policy in connection with which assets
 were disregarded (see subsection (f), the term "estate" includes all real and
 personal property in which the individual had legal title or interest at the
 time of death (to the extent of that interest), including assets conveyed to a
 survivor, heir or assignee of the deceased person through joint tenancy,
 tenancy in common, survivorship, life estate, living trust or other
 arrangement.

 2) "Beneficiary" - any
 person nominated in a will to receive an interest in property other than in a
 fiduciary capacity.

 3) "Heir" - any
 person entitled under the statutes to an interest in property of a
 decedent.

 b) The
 Department's claim against the estate of a deceased recipient or against the
 estate of the recipient's deceased spouse, regardless of the order of death,
 shall encompass: 1) All income maintenance
 assistance paid out at any time; and

 2) All medical assistance paid out: 
 A) at any time for a permanently
 institutionalized recipient whose real property is subject to the Department's
 lien; or

 B) except the costs of
 Community Care Program (CCP) services, prior to October 1, 1993, for a
 recipient 65 years of age or older; or

 C) on or after October 1, 1993, for a
 recipient 55 years of age or older; or

 D) for Medicare cost sharing expenses (Part A
 and B premiums, deductibles, coinsurance and copayments) made on behalf of
 persons described in 42
 U.S.C. 1396a(a)(10)(E) , when
 a request for payment of those expenses was received by the Department prior to
 January 1, 2010. Requests for payment of Medicare cost sharing expenses made
 after January 1, 2010 are exempt from estate
 recovery.

 c) 
 The claim shall apply to assistance provided to or on behalf of a recipient on
 or after the following dates: 

 Assistance Program

 Effective Date

 1)

 AABD (Aged) (AABD(A))

 1)

 1963

 2)

 AABD (Blind) and (Disabled) (AABD(B) and
 (D))

 2)

 November 1963

 3)

 MANG (Aged), (Blind), and (Disabled) (MANG(A),(B), and
 (D))

 3)

 January 1, 1966

 d) The
 Department shall not enforce a claim for medical assistance against any
 property, real or personal, of a deceased recipient while one or more of the
 following relatives survives: spouse of decedent, child under 21, or child over
 21 who is blind or permanently and totally disabled.

 e) The Department shall not enforce a claim
 for income maintenance assistance against homestead property of a deceased
 recipient while the homestead is occupied by one or more of the surviving
 relatives previously specified.

 f) 
 The Department shall not enforce a claim against the estate of a decedent to
 the extent assets were disregarded because the person was covered under a
 qualified long term care policy as provided under 89 Ill. Adm. Code
 120.382(c) .

 g) To avoid undue hardship, the Department
 will waive its right to recover from a decedent's estate if pursuing recovery
 would cause an heir or beneficiary of the estate to become or remain eligible
 for a public benefit program, such as SSI, TANF or SNAP. The Department may
 limit the scope of its waiver to that portion of the estate that the heir or
 beneficiary would receive and pursue recovery against the balance of the
 estate, if any. The Department will not waive recovery despite undue hardship
 if payment of the claims of other estate creditors that are equal or inferior
 in priority to the Department's claim will exhaust the estate and defeat the
 purpose of the waiver. The Department will provide written notice to heirs and
 beneficiaries known to the Department of the opportunity, time frame and method
 to request a waiver of estate recovery based on undue hardship.

 h) For decedents dying on or after July 1,
 2022, to prevent substantial and unreasonable hardship, the Department shall: 
 1) Waive any claim against the first
 $25,000.00 of an estate; and

 2) 
 Consider the gross assets in the estate, including, but not limited to, the net
 value of real estate less mortgages or liens with priority over the
 Department's claims.

 i) 
 The Department may defer or waive enforcement of its claim for income
 maintenance assistance if it determines that: 
 1) The deceased recipient is survived by a
 dependent spouse and minor child or children; or

 2) Rehabilitative training for employment or
 other means of self-support for the surviving spouse or children is feasible,
 and deferment or waiver will facilitate achievement of self-support status and
 prevent or reduce the likelihood of return to dependency on public assistance
 of the spouse or children.

 Notes

 Ill. Admin. Code
 tit. 89 , §
 102.210 

 Amended at 36 Ill. Reg. 4119, effective March 1,
 2012

 Amended at
 47
 Ill. Reg. 18017 , effective
 11/21/2023 

 State regulations are updated quarterly; we currently have two versions available.
 Below is a comparison between our most recent version and the prior quarterly release. 
 More comparison features will be added as we have more versions to compare.

 No prior version found.

 State Regulations Toolbox

 Accessibility 

 About LII 

 Contact us 

 Advertise here 

 Help 

 Terms of use 

 Privacy
