Source URL: https://www.in.gov/dA/cf98242e89/Medicaid_PM_4700.pdf?language_id=1
Retrieved: 2026-09-23

                                Indiana Health Coverage Program Policy Manual
                                                 Chapter 4700
                                               ESTATE RECOVERY
                                       Sections 4700.00.00 - 4725.00.00




CONTENTS

4700.00.00 ESTATE OF THE DECEASED (MED 1) .......................................................................... 1

4705.00.00 CLAIMS AGAINST THE ESTATE .................................................................................. 1

4710.00.00 NON-ENFORCEMENT OF CLAIM ............................................................................... 2

4715.00.00 FILING THE CLAIM .................................................................................................... 2

          4715.05.00 RECOVERY FROM CERTAIN TRUSTS ............................................................... 3

4720.00.00 OPENING AN ESTATE ................................................................................................ 3

4725.00.00 PRIORITY OF THE CLAIM ........................................................................................... 3

          4725.05.00 COMPROMISE OF CLAIMS............................................................................. 3

          4725.10.00 WAIVING ESTATE CLAIMS FOR UNDUE HARDSHIP ......................................... 4
4700.00.00 ESTATE OF THE DECEASED (MED 1)
The estate consists of all assets, including both real and personal property, owned by the
deceased recipient. An estate need not be established by formal legal proceedings. However, the
value of the estate may be established by FSSA, and a determination made of the total amount
payable for burial expenses.1


4705.00.00 CLAIMS AGAINST THE ESTATE
Under the provisions of the Social Security Act (42 U.S. Code §1396p) the state is required to
recover certain Medicaid benefits correctly paid on behalf of an individual from the individual's
estate.2
This includes any capitation payments made on behalf of the recipient. Capitation payments are
made each month on behalf of a member when they are enrolled with a Managed Care Entity
(health plan) for programs such as HIP, Hoosier Care Connect, or Pathways. Capitation rates may
include payments made for Medicaid services and for case management services with the health
plan. Medicaid providers generally have one hundred and eighty (180) days from the date of
death to file a claim for payment from Medicaid. Therefore, the amount of the claim may
continue to increase after the death of a Medicaid recipient.
The circumstances under which a recovery claim must be filed are explained in this and the
following sections.
Upon the death of a Medicaid recipient, the total amount paid for medical coverage, except as
explained in Section 4710.00.00 and Section 4725.10.00, is allowed as a preferred claim against
the estate of such person in favor of the state. All assets owned by the deceased individual at the
time of death, including both real and personal property, become a part of the estate, even if no
probate proceedings are initiated in court. The estate does not include property held jointly with
rights of survivorship, property held in trust, or life insurance proceeds paid to the deceased's
survivors or other beneficiaries.
The claim provision is applicable to all categories of MA, except for Medicare cost sharing
benefits which include the Medicaid categories of QMB (MA L), SLMB (MA J) and QI (MA I).3
Medicare premiums and Medicare cost sharing benefits paid for any member are not
recoverable.
A claim against the estate can be filed for Medicaid benefits "incorrectly paid" on behalf of a
recipient regardless of age.4
It is not required that there be a previous court judgment as to the amount of Medicaid benefits
incorrectly paid. However, the existence of such a court judgment would expedite the probate
proceedings when the claim against the estate is filed.


4710.00.00 NON-ENFORCEMENT OF CLAIM



                                                 1
If a spouse survives the recipient, recovery shall be made after the death of the surviving spouse.
Only those assets that were included in the recipient’s probate estate are subject to recovery
after the surviving spouse’s death.5
If the recipient (or the recipient’s spouse upon his or her death) is survived by a dependent child,
no recovery shall be made while the child is under age twenty-one (21) or is a dependent who is
non-supporting due to blindness or disability as determined under SSI standards.5
In addition, a claim may not be enforced against the personal effects, ornaments, or keepsakes
of the deceased.6
Resources that are protected under the Indiana Long Term Care Program (ILTCP) are not subject
to recovery from the recipient’s estate. Refer to Section 2615.25.15 concerning the ILTCP.7 A
claim may be waived if it is not cost effective to pursue the claim.


4715.00.00 FILING THE CLAIM
Estate administration may be accomplished using one of the following three procedures:
   •   Supervised administration (the normal procedure)
   •   Unsupervised administration
   •   No administration procedure

The process for filing claims depends on the type of estate administration procedures used.
When estates are administered under the supervised and unsupervised administration
procedures, the probate court first appoints a personal representative to administer the estate.
The personal representative then opens the estate. Once an estate is opened for probate, the
personal representative must serve notice of an estate administration to the Medicaid Estate
Recovery Unit if the decedent was at least fifty-five (55) years of age at the time of death and
died on or after June 30, 2018. 8. Beginning July 1, 2026, the Medicaid Estate Recovery Unit has
nine (9) months after the date of death of the decedent to file a claim in a probated estate. 9
A systematic and regular review of the legal notices and the probate docket of the county
probate court are to be made by the Medicaid Estate Recovery Unit to ascertain whether an
estate has been opened for any deceased Medicaid recipients. As soon as the Medicaid Estate
Recovery Unit learns that an estate has been opened, the Medicaid Estate Recovery Unit should
initiate the process for filing a claim with the probate court as applicable.
The claim against the estate should be filed with the Clerk of the Probate Court as soon as
possible. However, when a small estate claim affidavit is used, it is presented to whoever is
holding assets of the deceased and is not filed with the Clerk of Probate Court.


4715.05.00 RECOVERY FROM CERTAIN TRUSTS



                                                 2
Funds remaining in a Special Needs Trust, Pooled Trust, and/or Qualified Income Trust as defined
in Section 2615.75.15, are to be recovered up to the amount of Medicaid expenditures paid on
the individual’s behalf after the recipient's death.
These claims will not require the preparation of an affidavit or filing with the probate court.
Because the terms of the trusts and federal law require the trustee to pay any remaining funds
to the state up to the amount of Medicaid expenditures, the state's claim is to be presented to
the trustee for payment. This is accomplished by letter to the trustee signed by the Estate
Recovery Analyst with an explanation of Medicaid expenditures. The claim includes all Medicaid
expenditures paid on behalf of the deceased, regardless of age.
Pursuant to IC 12-15-2-17, funds remaining in a funeral trust that belonged to a Medicaid
recipient after the delivery of all services and merchandise under the contract must be sent to a
recipient’s estate or the State up to the amount of Medicaid expenditures paid on the
individual’s behalf after the age of fifty-five (55).


4720.00.00 OPENING AN ESTATE
If an estate is not opened, any interested party (such as a creditor) may petition the court to
open an estate and to request the appointment of an administrator. 10 Prior to petitioning the
court, these cases should be evaluated by the Medicaid Estate Recovery Unit in conjunction with
an FSSA attorney, to determine if there are sufficient assets in the estate to offset the cost of
opening and administering the estate. If not, opening an estate should not be initiated.
Cases in which there are sufficient assets or cases where certain non-probate transfers have
occurred should be referred to the Office of Attorney General to prepare and file with the court
a petition to open an estate and appoint an administrator.


4725.00.00 PRIORITY OF THE CLAIM
Payment of debts from resources in the estate of the decedent is made in accordance with
legally established priorities. Priority in the payment of claims is important whenever the estate
of the deceased is insolvent (such as when the total amount of all claims against the estate
exceeds the assets of the estate). If the amount of the FSSA claim is not satisfied in full after
distribution of the estate assets, such debt must be considered cancelled.
The FSSA attorney should be consulted regarding the order of priority of the FSSA claim in
relation to that of other claimants.


4725.05.00 COMPROMISE OF CLAIMS
IC 4-6-2-11 provides "No claim in favor of the state shall be compromised without the written
approval of the governor and the attorney general, and such officers are hereby empowered to
make such compromise when in their judgment, it is the interest of the state so to do."


                                                 3
This applies to situations where the State agrees to accept less than the amount that is available
and to which it is legally entitled. If the estate is insolvent and the State will receive the entire
balance of the estate after payment of claims that have higher priority, that is not a compromise
and it does not require the approval of the governor and attorney general.
The settlement must be in the State's best interest and can only be approved if it is cost effective
for the State. Some examples of when a compromise may be cost effective are when:
   •   Another claim arguably has priority such as expenses of last illness
   •   There is a legitimate dispute as to the amount of the claim
   •   The asset is a land contract or other asset that is not easily liquidated, and the State
       agrees to accept cash in a lesser amount.

Typically, the Estate Recovery Analyst or the FSSA attorney will be contacted by the estate of a
deceased member regarding a potential settlement of the FSSA’s claim. The Estate Recovery
Analyst and FSSA attorney will review the proposed settlement to see if it would be cost effective
for the State. If the proposed settlement is found to be cost effective, the Estate Recovery Analyst
will create a referral packet for the Office of Attorney General containing all relevant information
and communications, including but not limited to:
   •   The amount of the claim
   •   Available assets in the estate
   •   The proposed settlement
   •   The reason for settlement
   •   Why it is in the best interest of the State to accept the settlement.

4725.10.00 WAIVING ESTATE CLAIMS FOR UNDUE HARDSHIP
The Medicaid program's claim against the estate of a deceased recipient must be waived if
enforcement of the claim would result in undue hardship for a beneficiary.11 The term “undue
hardship” is a term of art that is defined in 405 IAC 2-8-2.
The decision to approve or deny an application for a waiver of the estate recovery claim will be
made by the Medicaid Estate Recovery Unit based on information provided by the beneficiary
and the FSSA attorney in accordance with the following procedures.
At the time a claim is filed, a notice is to be included with the claim, explaining the undue
hardship provisions and the process for applying for a waiver of the State's claim. An application
(State Form 48259/OMPP 003) is to be provided upon request to a beneficiary who wishes to
apply for a waiver.
The hardship applicant will complete the form and return it, along with supporting
documentation, to the FSSA attorney or to the Medicaid Estate Recovery Unit. The applicant
must indicate one of the following situations as the basis for their claim:
   •   Causing a beneficiary of the decedent's estate to become eligible for public assistance. As
       used in this section, "public assistance" means:

                                                  4
       o Aid to Families with Dependent Children;
       o Medicaid;
       o SNAP; or
       o Supplemental Security Income.
   •   Causing a beneficiary of the decedent’s estate who is currently eligible for public
       assistance to remain dependent on that public assistance.
   •   The complete loss of an income-producing asset or assets when the:
       o Beneficiary of the decedent’s estate has no other source of income; and
       o Beneficiary’s income does not exceed one hundred percent (100%) of the poverty
           level as determined annually by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.
   •   Other compelling circumstances described by the applicant, as determined on a case-by-
       case basis by the office.

An undue hardship does not exist in circumstances where the state's recovery simply results
in a loss of a preexisting standard of living or the loss of an expectation of an inheritance. 12
If the applicant indicates that they may be eligible for an undue hardship waiver, the application
must be sent to the following:
       Medicaid Estate Recovery Program
       Indiana Family and Social Services Administration
       402 W. Washington St., W451 MS27
       Indianapolis, IN 46204
If the applicant specifies hardship category under 405 IAC 2-8-2(b)(1), the applicant must provide
proof to the Medicaid Estate Recovery Unit that the applicant would be eligible for TANF,
Medicaid, SNAP, or SSI if they lose access to the asset(s) in the deceased recipient's estate. The
Medicaid Estate Recovery Analyst’s determination must show the eligibility result as if the
applicant owned the asset and as if they did not own it.

 Example:
 A member and non-disabled son live together on a farm. The son works on the farm, and the
 member shares the farm income with their son. The property is in the members’ name only
 and when the member dies, the property becomes subject to estate recovery. The son, who is
 beneficiary of the estate, applies for an undue hardship waiver claiming that without the
 income from the property, the son will become eligible for public assistance benefits. The
 Medicaid Estate Recovery Unit must review the documents to see if the son would be eligible
 for public assistance benefits. (The son does not need to file an application). The Medicaid
 Estate Recovery Analyst determines that if the son were to own the farm, they would not be
 eligible for public assistance benefits due to the income they would have from the farm.
 Without the farm and its income, the son would meet public assistance benefits eligibility
 requirements. Therefore, if the FSSA enforces its claim against the estate, the child will
 become eligible for public assistance benefits.



                                                  5
In the above example, assume that member and son do not live together. The son is employed,
and the family receives public assistance benefits. When the member dies, the son files an
undue hardship waiver application claiming that if they could be allowed to inherit the farm, they
would no longer need public assistance benefits. The Medicaid Estate Recovery Analyst
determination shows that if they owned the farm, they would lose public assistance benefits
eligibility.
The undue hardship waiver applicant is responsible for providing all necessary verifications to
the Medicaid Estate Recovery Unit at the address listed above. Failure to timely provide
necessary information and documentation may lead to the denial of an undue hardship waiver.
Medicaid Estate Recovery Analysts should apply the usual verification requirements in an undue
hardship waiver determination and inform the applicant in writing of the documentation that
must be provided to substantiate the hardship claim. The Medicaid Estate Recovery Analyst will
need to inform the applicant of the various types of acceptable verification; however, the
responsibility for obtaining the verification rests solely with the applicant. Any undue hardships
must be filed with the Estate Recovery Unit within ninety (90) calendar days of the date the
executor or personal representative of the estate receives notice of the FSSA’s claim. The
Medicaid Estate Recovery Unit shall review and rule on the undue hardship waiver application
within forty-five (45) calendar days after the receipt of a fully completed undue hardship waiver
application. 13
If an undue hardship waiver applicant claims that the only source of income comes from the
income-producing asset in the estate, the Medicaid Estate Recovery Analyst must determine
whether that income is less than the FPL. For the current annual FPL limits set by the Federal
Government please refer to the following website: https://aspe.hhs.gov/poverty-guidelines for
the current standards. For this determination, family units are defined as a group of people
related by birth, marriage, or adoption who live together. In determining the amount of income
to compare to the standard, the Specialist will consider:
     •     Gross income from employment
     •     All unearned income
     •     Net self-employment income and rental income in accordance with the methodologies
           used for the aged, blind, and disabled Medicaid categories. The applicant is responsible
           for providing the necessary verifications.

The Medicaid Estate Recovery Unit will decide to approve or deny the application and issue a
Notice of Action, State Form 48260/OMPP 0004, to the applicant within forty-five (45) days of
the application date. An applicant has 30 days to appeal this decision.


1 IC 12-15-9
2 Social Security Act, Section 1917(b)(1), Indiana State Plan 4.17
3 Social Security Act, Section 1917(b)(1), Indiana State Plan 4.17
4 IC 12-15-2-19, H.R.2264 - Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1993, Subchapter B: Medicaid - Part I: Services, Part II: Eligibility



                                                                          6
5 IC 12-15-9-2
6 IC 12-15-9-2
7 405 IAC 2-8-1(e)(2)
8 IC 29-1-7-7
9 IC 29-1-14-1
10 IC 29-1-14-1
11 405 IAC 2-8-2
12 405 IAC 2-8-2
13 405 IAC 2-8-2




                        7

