Source URL: https://provider.indianamedicaid.com/ihcp/StatePlan/Attachments_and_Supplements/Section_4/4.17a.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-09-23

Rev ision : lI e FA - PM - 95-3 (MB)                                          Attac hment 4.17 - A
                                                              Page I

                        State Plan Under Title XIX of the Soc ial Security Act
                             State! Territory:    INDIANA

                               Liens and Adj ustments or Recoveries


I. The State uses the following proce ss to determine that an institutionali zed individual cannot
reasonably be expected to be disc harged from the med ical institution and return home.

   The State requests verification/rom the attending physician ofthe institutionalized
   individual 's status immediately preceding giving notice ofthe Stale 's in/em to fi le a lien on
   the recipient 's real p rop erty.

2. The followi ng criter ia are used for estab lishing that a permanently institutionalized
individual' s son or daughter provided care as specified under regulatio ns at 42 CFR § 433.36 (t) .

   A written statement from the son or doughier describ ing the ope and amount of care
   provided 10 the parent by the son or daughter and the effect such care may have had on the
   parent 's ability to remain at home. The statement sho uld include appropriate documentation
   to substantiate that the care was necessary and provided. S uch do cumentation may include
   do ctor 's statements. statements of neighbors or other relatives, cop ies ofcance lled chec ks.
   bank statements. credit card statements. income lax returns or other do cum ents or
   correspondence evidencing the extent and ope ofcare provided.

3. The State defines the term s below as follows:

           •   Estate

   All real and personal prope rty and other asse ts included within an individual 's probate
   estate;
 Any interest in rea l p roperty owned by the individual at the lime ofdeath that was conveyed to
  the individual's survivor thro ugh j oint tenancy with right ofsurvivorship, if the j oint tenancy
  was created after June 30, 20 02 and;
 Any real or p ersonal property conveyed through a non-probate transfer.
  Nonprobate transfer means a valid transfe r, effective 01 death. by a tra nsferor:
               Whose last domicile was in Indiana: and
               Who immediately before death had the power, acting atone. 10 prevent transf er 0/
               the property by revocation or withdrawal and;
                       -Use the property f or the benefit ofthe transferor; or
                       -Apply the property 10 discharge cla ims against the transf eror 's probate
                       estate.
 The term does not include Iransf er 0/ survivorship interest in a tenancy by the entire ties real
 estate, or payment ofdeath proceeds of a life ins urance policy .



TN No . 05 - 012
Supersedes                   Approval DatJlAR1 0 2006          Effec tive Date October 1, 2005
TN No . 03 - 0 19
Revision : IICFA - PM - 95-3          (M B)                            Attac hme m -l. f Z - A
                                                                       Page la

                     Slate Plan Under Title XIX of the Social Security Act
                  State! Territory:    INDIANA


      Any sum due after June 30. 200j, 10 a person after the dea th ofa Medicaid recipient thai
      is under the terms ofan annuity contrac t p urchased after May J. 2005. with the assets of
                      A) the Medicaid recip ient: or
                      B) the Medicaid recipient 's spouse

    Assets included in the estate ofthe Medicaid recipient 's survi ving spouse are included after
    the death a/the surviving spouse. If the surviving
    spouse has remarried. assets that are attrib utable 10 the surviving spouse 's subsequent
    spouse are not included

          •   Individual' s home

              The recipient's place ofresidence prior to institutionalization

          •   Equity interest in the home

              Any equitable right , title, or interest in real property.

          •   Residing in the home for at least two years on a con tinuous basis

              Using the home as the principal pla ce ofresiden ce.

          •   Discharge from the medical institution and return home

              Discharge from a medical institution is actual discharge to the recipient 's home,
              which is not a medical institution. Discharge does not include medical leave days
              or therapeutic leave days, or visitation to home as per a plan oftreatment.

          •   Lawfu lly residing

              Residing in the recipient 's p lace of residence with the perm ission of the owners,
              or ifunder guardianship, th e own er 's legal guardian.




TN No . 05-0 12
Supersedes            Approval Date MAR 1 0 ZOO6               Effective Date October 1, 2005
TN No. 03-019
Revision: HCFA· PM-95-3 (MB)                                                           AlTACIlMENT 4 11-A
         MAY 1995                                                                      PAGE 2

                          STATE PLAN UNDER TITLE XIX OF TH E SOCIAL SECURITY ACT
                               StatelTerritory:    Indiana

4. Ttu ; STATE DEFINES UNDUE IJARDSlllr AS FOL LOWS :

(I ) causing an heir to hecome eligible for public assistance
(2) causing an heir who is currently eligible for public assistance to remain dependent on that public
        assistance
(3) the complete loss of sale income-producing asset of the heir when the heir's income does not exceed
        100% of the federal poverty level
(4) other compelling circumstances as determined on a case-by-case basis by the State

5 . T ns FOLLOWING STANDARDS AND PROCEDURES ARE USED BY THE STATE FOR WAIVING ESTATE
   RECOVERIES WHEN RECOVERY WOULD CAUSE AN UNDUE HARDSHIP. AND WHEN RECOVERY IS NOT COST
   EFFECTIVE:


Applications for undue hardship waivers shall be filed with the Medicaid agency within 90 calendar days
of the date that the executor or personal representative of the deceased 's estate receives notification of
the State' s claim. The Medicaid agency shall review and rule on an application for waiver of the State 's
claim within 45 calendar days of the receipt of a properly completed waiver application . The agency
may not grant an undue hardship waiver if the granting of such waiver will result in the payment of
claims to other creditors with a lower pr iority standing in accordance with Ie 29-1-14-9 .

6 . THE STATE DEFINES COST-EFFECTIVE AS FOLLOWS (IN CLUDE METHODOLOGY/THRESHOLDS USED TO
    DETERMINE COST-EFFECTIVENESS):


Recovery is not cost-effective when OMPP determ ines that attorneys' fees and other expenses of
collection equal or exceed the amount that OMP? expects to collect. If the agency determines that it is
most cost-effective to compromise the State's claim. the compromise must be approved by the Attorney
General and the Governor .

7 . T n t STATE USES THE FOLLOWING COLLECTION PROCEDURES (INCLUDE SPECIFIC ELEMENTS CONTAINED
   IN THE ADVANC E NOT ICE REQUIREMENT , THE METHOD FOR APPLYING FOR A WAIVER, HEARING AND
   APPEALS PROCEDURES, AND TIME FRAMES INVOLVED) :


When the agency receives notice of the death of a recipient. former recipient . or a deceased recipient's
spouse. the agency will file a claim against the estate in probate COUrl. If the estate is valued at under
$25,000 and no probate estate is opened. the agency will file an affidavit in support of its claim with any
entity that holds funds or property belonging to the deceased . The agency shall notify the executor or
personal representative of the deceased recipient 's estate of the State's claim and the affected heir 's right
to apply for an undue hardship waiver. If the agency reviews such an application and determines that an
undue hardship does not exist. the agency shall notify the applicant in writing and inform the applicant
of his right to request an administrative hearing within 30 days of receipt of the agency's decision that an
undue hardship waiver has been denied.


TN No.     05-012
Supersedes                     Approval Dale MAR 1 0 2006              Effective Dare October 1, 2005
TN No.     95-024

