Source URL: https://khap.kdhe.ks.gov/KEESM/Jan_2020_Output/1725.htm
Retrieved: 2026-09-23

New 1725 

 Medical - Kansas Economic 
 and Employment Services Manual

 1000 Administrative Information

 1 725 
 Estate Recovery Program -  See Policy Memo 2002-10-02, 
 re: Prepaid 
 Funeral Agreements . 

 The estate 
 recovery program has been established as a means to recover medical care 
 costs from the estates and property of certain medical assistance recipients. 
 The administration of the Estate Recovery program is the responsibility 
 of the Estate Recovery Unit (ERU) in KDHE-DHCF.  ERU handles all 
 post-death recovery actions, court action, lien imposition, negotiations 
 and other related activities. KDHE-DHCF has delegated some legal and administrative 
 responsibilities to a private contractor, currently Health Management 
 Systems. ERU is responsible for oversight of the contractor. Neither ERU 
 nor the contractor provide eligibility determinations. Eligibility staff 
 are responsible for the determination as well as basic education regarding 
 the Estate Recovery program .    

 1725.1 Recoveries 
 through Court - Beginning July 1, 1992, the agency is allowed to 
 establish a legal claim for medical assistance provided after June 30, 
 1992 to persons who, prior to their death:

 • were 55 years of age or older (except for 
 recipients of QMB, LMB, or QWD only); or

 • were receiving long-term institutional 
 care, including when provided through a PACE program at the time of death.

 The claim would normally be filed against the client's decedent's, conservatorship's 
 and guardianship's estate. These estates consist of the property owned 
 solely by the deceased medical assistance recipient.

 1.   Expanded 
 Estate - For medical assistance provided on or before June 30, 
 2004 the agency's claim applies to the aforementioned estate. However, 
 for medical assistance provided after June 30, 2004, the agency may establish 
 a claim on any property interest owned by the deceased medical assistance 
 recipient. The agency’s claim will apply to the deceased recipient’s 'medical 
 assistance estate' (K.S.A. 39-709). This estate will include all real 
 and personal property in which the deceased individual had any legal title 
 or interest immediately before or at the time of death to the extent of 
 that interest or title. The medical assistance estate includes, without 
 limitation, assets conveyed to a survivor, heir or assign of the deceased 
 recipient through joint tenancy, tenancy-in-common, survivorship, transfer-on-death 
 deed, pay-on-death contract, life estate, trust, annuity, life insurance 
 policy (whole or term life) or similar arrangement. The medical assistance 
 estate is limited to the recipient’s interest in the property. The expanded 
 definition also applies to the surviving spouse of a recipient. 

 Example : 
 A medical assistance recipient has an interest in a house valued at $100,000. 
 He added his daughter’s name to the deed 7 years earlier when his wife 
 died. The deed is a joint tenancy deed with rights of survivorship. He 
 received medical assistance for the period of July 2003 through June 2005 
 with a total claim amount of $60,000. He received $30,000 in benefits 
 in the period of July 1, 2004 to June 30, 2005 when he died. The house 
 is the only asset. The state has a claim for $30,000 (July 1, 2004 - June 
 30, 2005) against his half - interest ($50,000) in his house. Assistance 
 provided prior to July 1, 2004 cannot be used as a claim against his interest 
 in the house.

 2.  Exceptions 
 to Claims through Courts - If there is a surviving spouse, no probate 
 would be started and no claim would be filed at the time of the individual’s 
 death.  A claim will not be established if the surviving children 
 are under the age of 21 years or are blind or permanently disabled according 
 to Social Security criteria.  No claim will be established for those 
 who solely received coverage under QMB, LMB,or QWD.

 3.   Priority 
 of Claims in Courts - In cases involving a decedent’s estate, the 
 claim will be a first class claim against the estate of the deceased person. 
 Payment of reasonable funeral expenses will be the only allowable claim 
 prior to a medical assistance claim. In cases involving a guardianship 
 or conservatorship, the claim is discretionary with the court and is payable 
 in the amount determined by the court. 

 1725.2 Liens 
 - In cases where a medical assistance recipient has received inpatient 
 care from a nursing home or other medical institution and the recipient 
 is not reasonably expected to return home, the agency may impose a lien 
 on the recipient’s real property.

 A lien may only be imposed on persons who have received funded care 
 in a Medicaid approved facility (see 8112 
 and 8172 ), including those receiving 
 institutional care under a PACE plan for at least 6 months. Liens are 
 NOT applicable to persons in independent living (including QMB, LMB and 
 Working Healthy), receiving HCBS, PACE services in the community or to 
 nursing facility residents where payments are not being made to the facility.

 1. Medical 
 Verification - Once the recipient 
 has been continuously institutionalized and received 6 months of compensated 
 institutional care, the agency may presume that the recipient will not 
 be discharged from the facility to return home.    When 
 that occurs, the agency will create a report listing all recipients meeting 
 the 6-month threshold and send it to the estate recovery unit (ERU) for 
 review.    The 
 report should be run and sent to ERU no later than the end of the seventh 
 month in which compensated institutional care has been received. 

 2. Notice 
 to Recipient of Agency’s Intent to Impose Lien - If the agency 
 determines the recipient is not reasonably expected to return home, the 
 ERU will send a notice to the recipient or the recipient’s representative 
 of the agency’s determination and the agency’s intent to impose a medical 
 assistance lien on real property owned by the recipient.

 3.   Administrative 
 Hearing - The agency’s notice will advise the recipient or representative 
 of their right to request an administrative hearing. The notice will specify 
 the method and time limits for requesting such hearing. The issue at the 
 hearing will be whether the recipient can reasonably be expected to be 
 discharged and returned home. If no hearing is requested within the time 
 period for requesting a hearing outlined in 1611.1 
  , the agency may file a lien on the real property of the recipient.

 If a hearing has been requested, no lien 
 may be imposed until administrative and judicial matters have been completed. 

 4. Imposition 
 of Lien - To impose a lien, the agency will file a written lien 
 with the Register of Deeds of the county where the real property is located. 

 5.   Restrictions 
 on Imposition of Lien - The medical assistance lien may not be 
 imposed on the home of the recipient when any of the following individuals 
 are residing in the home:

 a. spouse of such recipient, (lien may be 
 imposed if spouse is not living in the home);

 b. recipient’s child who :

 i. under the age of 21; 

 ii. blind; or

 iii. permanently disabled;

 c. recipient’s sibling who has equity interest 
 in recipient’s home and who has continuously resided in the home for at 
 least one year immediately prior to the recipient’s admission into a medical 
 facility for long-term care and continues to reside therein.  

 6.   Content 
 and Value of Lien - The lien shall state the nature and amount 
 of the lien at the time of imposition, the legal description of the property 
 affected and the recipient’s interest in the property. Lien value will 
 be based on the amount of assistance paid on behalf of the recipient beginning 
 6 months from the date the recipient became eligible for compensated inpatient 
 care until the filing of the lien plus any amount paid thereafter by the 
 agency on behalf of the recipient.  

 7. Priority 
 of Lien - The medical assistance lien is junior and subject to 
 all prior liens of record.  

 8. Foreclosure 
 of Lien - The agency may foreclose a medical assistance lien by 
 filing an action in a Kansas district court for the county where the property 
 is located. This action may be filed before or after the death of the 
 recipient and may be filed in a civil action or as part of a probate proceeding. 
 Such foreclosure are limited by the restrictions in (9).  

 9. Restrictions 
 on Enforcement of Liens - The medical assistance lien may not be 
 enforced after the death of the recipient and his or her spouse. A lien 
 on the home may not be enforced when any of following are residing in 
 the home:

 a. recipient’s child who:

 i. under the age of 21; 

 ii. blind or permanently disabled;

 iii. provided care to the recipient, allowing 
 him or her to remain in the home and defer NF entry for at least 2 years

 b. a sibling who had resided in the home 
 for one or more years immediately before the recipient’s admission to 
 the nursing home or medical facility and has resided there continuously 
 since that time.

 10. Release 
 of Liens - The medical assistance lien generally remains on the 
 property unless:

 a. the lien is satisfied;

 b. the lien is terminated by foreclosure 
 of a prior lien of record or settlement action taken in lieu of foreclosure;

 c. the lien is foreclosed by the agency;

 d. a waiver of estate recovery action has 
 been granted (see 1725.3 ); or

 e. the recipient leaves the nursing home 
 or medical facility and returns to and resides on the property subject 
 to the medical assistance lien for a continuous period of 90 days.

 11. Lien 
 Dormancy - If the medical assistance lien has not been foreclosed 
 within 10 years from the date of filing the lien, the lien will become 
 dormant and cease to operate as a lien on the real estate. Such dormant 
 lien may be revived under the provisions of K.S.A. 60-2403 et seq. 

 1725.3 
 Waiver of Estate Recovery Action - A recipient, a recipients spouse 
 or a member of recipients surviving family may request a waiver of estate 
 recovery action including liens when there will an undue hardship. This 
 waiver could apply to either or both court claims and lien imposition. 
 Each case will be examined on its own merits and circumstances. The factors 
 for evaluating a waiver are:

  1.Type of assets involved in the case;

 2. Availability of alternative means for 
 satisfying the claim;

 3. Actions of the family in helping decedent; 
 particularly when such actions helped avoid or reduce medical costs which 
 would have otherwise been incurred by the Medicaid program;

 4. Impact of recovery action on the financial 
 circumstances of the surviving family;

 5. Impact of recovery action on business 
 in which the decedent owned an interest; and

 6. Any other relevant factors.

 1725.4 
 Determining Recovery Action - The determination of recovery action, 
 if any, is a three step process: Notification of death, resource assessment, 
 and determining the value of the claim based on the amount of medical 
 assistance paid by the agency since 7-1-92.

 1. Notification 
 of Death - The Estate Recovery Unit (ERU) shall be responsible 
 for coordinating and obtaining all information concerning the death of 
 any medical recipient. Such information may be obtained from newspaper 
 obituaries, eligibility staff, legal notice from representatives of a 
 recipient's estate, other governmental agencies, or other reliable sources. 
 Upon receipt of notification of death of an individual, the ERU will attempt 
 to match the deceased with case information in KEES. The eligibility worker 
 will confirm any match and other family and/or resource information prior 
 to any ERU recovery activity. If there is a surviving spouse, recovery 
 action will be pended until the death of the surviving spouse.

 2. Resource 
 Assessment - In cases where the deceased has no surviving spouse 
 or dependent children, the ERU will begin a preliminary assessment of 
 the individual's resources. Assessment will consist of determining the 
 type of property, value, and title or ownership. All assets can be considered 
 for recovery including real property, financial accounts, and other personal 
 property (e.g., other liquid assets, cars, furniture, and jewelry).

 3. Determining 
 Value of Claim - ERU will research and determine the cost of medical 
 assistance paid after June 30, 1992 on behalf of a recipient who is 55 
 years of age or older or who was receiving institutional PACE or HCBS 
 services. Assistance provided to a recipient before the recipient's 55th 
 birthday will not be considered in valuing the claim unless that person 
 was in long term care. The value of assistance received after June 30, 
 2004 will also be determined and used is handling claims against the expanded 
 estate as per 1725.1 (1). The estate recovery claim will be reduced by 
 the amount of payments made by a long term care insurance policy on behalf 
 of the recipient.

 1725.5 
 Recovery Actions by Estate Recovery Unit - The ERU will determine 
 the appropriate action to be taken in regard to filing claims. This may 
 occur through one of several avenues including, but not limited to, agreements 
 with heirs, claims against financialaccounts, and filing of probate action.

 In some circumstances the heirs of the deceased 
 may choose not to initiate probate proceedings. In these instances ERU 
 will determine whether to proceed with probate based on the nature of 
 the agency's claim, value of estate assets, presence of other creditors 
 and any other relevant information.

 ERU may file a claim against accounts of 
 a deceased recipient held at financial institutions. Notice of claim will 
 be in writing. The notice of claim will be forwarded to any financial 
 institution identified by ERU as a holder of a recipient's account. After 
 notification of the claim, the financial institution is barred from distributing 
 the account to a beneficiary until the claim of the agency is satisfied.

 ERU will also file a claim for monies held 
 in a personal needs account for a recipient at a nursing home. Nursing 
 homes are required to forward the personal needs accounts to the agency 
 upon the death of a recipient of medical assistance. The funds in the 
 personal needs accounts will be used in satisfying the claim. In addition, 
 ERU will advise the appropriate court, if probate proceedings are initiated, 
 of any amounts received by ERU. ERU will also assume responsibility for 
 distribution of the funds in these accounts to funeral homes to cover 
 the unmet expenses of funeral services.

 In accordance with Kansas law, funeral homes, 
 cemeteries, life insurance companies and other entities holding funds 
 establishing a burial or funeral agreement for a medical assistance recipient, 
 or the spouse of a former medical assistance recipient,are required to 
 remit any funds remaining after payment of reasonable funeral expenses 
 to ERU. This is applicable to all funeral or burial plans regardless of 
 the funding source, including but not limited to, bank accounts, trusts, 
 annuities, burial insurance, life insurance and certificates of deposit. 
 This also applies to term life insurance policies specifically assigned 
 to a provider of funeral services. It does not apply to non-assigned life 
 insurance polices or accounts. However, such items may become part of 
 the estate and therefore, subject to recovery. To support this provision, 
 all medical assistance applicants or recipients are required to notify 
 the agency upon the establishment of any prearranged burial agreement. 
 This information is then recorded on KEES. In addition, individuals are 
 also required to notify the funeral home holding any pre-arranged burial 
 agreement if medical assistance is approved.  The funeral home is 
 then required to notify the entity holding the funds associated with the 
 prepaid account.

 1725.6 
 Voidable Transfers - Transfers of property by medical assistance 
 recipients subject to the estate recovery provisions can be voided based 
 on State law. The estate recovery unit (ERU) can take legal action against 
 the recipient and have such transfers set aside, thus returning ownership 
 of the property to the individual. This provision is applicable for any 
 transfer made by a Medicaid recipient. Transfers prior to the date of 
 application are also included if the individual transferring property 
 is ultimately approved for prior medical assistance for the date the transfer 
 occurred. Any transfers made prior to the effective date of medical coverage 
 are not voidable but are subject to the provisions of 5720 
 and subsections.

 1. Recipients subject to voidable transfers. 
 Transfers by the following recipients would be considered under this provision.

 a. Persons 55 years of age or older, including 
 those in independent living or long term care arrangements (except for 
 QMB, LMB, or QWD only recipients; and 

 b. Persons receiving long term institutional 
 or HCBS care.

 Any partial or total transfer of property 
 may be considered including transfers of exempted property such as a home 
 or a car. Transfers to children, as defined in 1725, or transfers resulting 
 from the spousal impoverishment provisions of 8144 
 and 8244 will not be voided. However, 
 transfers between a two spouses other than for spousal impoverishment 
 purposes will be considered. This would include transfer of the home property 
 and later acquired assets which would not fall under the original resource 
 division.

 Transfers which equal or exceed the following 
 threshold amounts shall be referred to the ERU. These thresholds are to 
 be viewed as a guideline for staff in order to provide latitude to the 
 client to meet ongoing living expenses while helping to prevent

 a concerted attempt to divest resources in 
 order to deplete the estate. They were also developed to avoid unnecessary 
 administrative burden on staff to investigate and refer all transfers.

 2. Property Limits

 a. For real property, the total value of 
 the property transferred must be $5,000 or more.

 b. For personal property, the total value 
 of the property transferred must be $500 or more. This would include but 
 is not limited to checking accounts, savings accounts, C.D.s, stocks, 
 bonds, life insurance cash values, and trust funds.

 Information regarding such transfers is to 
 be referred to the ERU for determination of action. Any resulting penalty 
 period per 5720 
  shall be applied prior to referring to ERU for a determination. 
 If ERU determines action to void the transfer will not be taken, the transfer 
 penalty remains in place. If action to void will be initiated, any payment 
 denied because of a transfer penalty will be reversed and payment may 
 be authorized. If the transfer is ultimately voided, eligibility shall 
 be reevaluated considering the property.

 It should be noted that the guidelines in 
 this section do not directly parallel the transfer provisions of 5720 
 . Transfers of property may be voided even though they would not be penalized 
 under the guidelines of 5720 
  (e.g., transfers between spouses or transfers by persons in independent 
 living.) In addition, only transfers by persons ultimately considered 
 recipients can be voided whereas transfers of both applicants and recipients 
 can be penalized under the provisions of 5720 
 .

 1725.7 
 Pre-Payment of Claim - The recipient may choose to make a pre-payment 
 against the Estate Recovery claim.  This is a voluntary option 
 available to the recipient and may be appropriate where:

 1.  The recipient is reducing excess 
 resources to within the allowable program resource limit in order to retain 
 on-going resource eligibility.      

 2.  The recipient is no longer 
 receiving assistance but wishes to satisfy the claim in  whole or 
 in part prior to death.

 A recipient choosing this voluntary option 
 should be referred to Estate Recovery. Estate Recovery will assess 
 the amount of the proposed payment against the current size of the claim 
 to determine if this is an acceptable option.  Estate Recovery 
 cannot accept a payment that exceeds the current amount of the claim.  The 
 claim will be reduced by the amount of any pre-payment accepted by Estate 
 Recovery.
