Source URL: https://www.law.cornell.edu/regulations/louisiana/La-Admin-Code-tit-50-SS-I-8103
Retrieved: 2026-09-23

La. Admin. Code tit. 50, § I-8103 - General Provisions | State Regulations | US Law | LII / Legal Information Institute 

 Please help us improve our site!

 × 

 No thank you 

 Skip to main content 

 Cornell Law
 School 
 Search
 Cornell 

 Toggle navigation 

 Please help
 us improve our site! 

 Support Us! 

 Search 

 About
 LII 

 Who We Are 

 What We Do 

 Who Pays For This 

 Contact Us 

 Get the
 law 

 Constitution 

 Supreme Court 

 U.S. Code 

 CFR 

 Federal Rules 

 Federal Rules of Appellate Procedure 

 Federal Rules of Civil Procedure 

 Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure 

 Federal Rules of Evidence 

 Federal Rules of Bankruptcy Procedure 

 U.C.C. 

 Law by jurisdiction 

 State law 

 Uniform laws 

 Federal law 

 World law 

 Lawyer directory 

 Legal encyclopedia 

 Business law 

 Constitutional law 

 Criminal law 

 Family law 

 Employment law 

 Money and Finances 

 More... 

 Help out 

 Give 

 Sponsor 

 Advertise 

 Create 

 Promote 

 Join Lawyer Directory 

 LII 

 State Regulations 

 Louisiana Administrative Code 

 Title 50 - PUBLIC HEALTH-MEDICAL ASSISTANCE 

 Part I - Administration 

 Subpart 9 - Recovery 

 Chapter 81 - Estate Recovery 

 La. Admin. Code tit. 50, § I-8103 - General Provisions

 La. Admin. Code tit. 50, § I-8103 - General Provisions 

 State Regulations 

 Compare

 A. 
 Medicaid estate recovery is not a condition of eligibility. The
 applicant/recipient shall be informed at the time of
 application/redetermination that federal law and regulations mandate estate
 recovery action by the states and that medical assistance claims paid by the
 department may be subject to estate recovery. A notice of estate recovery is
 provided to the applicant as part of the application process.

 B. Recovery Limits 
 1. Recovery can only be made after the death
 of the recipient's surviving spouse, if any, and only at the time when the
 recipient has no surviving child under age 21, or a child who is blind or
 disabled as defined in Section 1614 of the Social Security Act. Recovery may be
 deferred until the death of the surviving spouse or children reach the age of
 21 or are no longer blind or disabled.

 2. Recovery cannot be made for Medicare
 cost-sharing benefits (i.e., Part A and Part B premiums, deductibles,
 coinsurance, and co-payments) paid under the Medicaid State Plan.

 C. Recovery Adjustments 
 1. Recovery may be waived in cases in which
 it is not cost-effective for the state to recover from the recipient's
 estate.

 2. Recovery shall be waived
 if it will cause an undue hardship on any child of the deceased
 recipient.

 3. The recovery may be
 lessened by reducing the estate value in consideration of reasonable and
 necessary documented expenses incurred by the decedent's heirs to maintain the
 homestead during the period in which the recipient was in a long term care
 facility or received home and community-based services, if the homestead is
 part of the estate.

 D. 
 Recovery Notice 1. The department will seek
 recovery for medical assistance from the decedent's estate. The family or heirs
 will be given advance notice of the proposed action and the time frame in which
 they have the opportunity to apply for an undue hardship waiver and/or dispute
 the recovery.

 2. A notice of
 Medicaid estate recovery will be served on the executor, authorized
 representative or succession attorney of the decedent's estate. If there is no
 executor, authorized representative or succession attorney, the notice will be
 sent to the family or the heirs. The notice shall specify the following
 information: a. the deceased recipient's name
 and Medicaid identification number;

 b. the action the state intends to
 take;

 c. the reason for the
 action;

 d. the dates of services
 associated with the recovery action and the estimated amount of the
 department's claim, i.e., amount to be recovered against the recipient's
 estate;

 e. the right to and
 procedure for applying for a hardship waiver;

 f. the authorized representative's right to a
 hearing;

 g. the method by which the
 authorized representative may obtain a hearing; and

 h. the time periods involved in requesting a
 hearing or in exercising any procedural requirements under the Medicaid Estate
 Recovery Program.

 3. The
 notice shall request that copies of all succession pleadings filed in
 connection with the succession of the decedent, including any judgment(s) of
 possession be provided to the department. a. 
 In the event no succession has been judicially opened, the department is to be
 advised as to when such documents will be available and/or when the succession
 is expected to be opened.

 E. Recovery Privilege 
 1. The claim of the department shall have a
 privilege on the total estate with a priority equivalent to an expense of last
 illness as prescribed in Civil Code Article 3252 et seq.

 2. The department may file a proof of claim
 based on its privilege.

 F. Recovery Exclusions 
 1. If an individual was insured under a
 qualifying long-term care insurance partnership policy and received Medicaid
 benefits as a result of resources being disregarded in the eligibility
 determination, the department shall not seek adjustment or recovery from the
 individual's estate for the amount of the resources disregarded. 
 a. The resource disregard is determined on a
 1:1 ratio. For each $1 of a qualifying long-term care insurance partnership
 policy benefit, $1 of countable resources is disregarded or excluded during the
 eligibility determination process.

 2. The department shall not seek recovery or
 adjustment from an individual's estate for the amount of Medicare cost-sharing
 benefits paid on behalf of an individual that was enrolled in any one of the
 following Medicaid programs: a. Qualified
 Medicare Beneficiaries (QMB); i. including
 individuals who are classified as QMB Plus and receive full Medicaid coverage
 in addition to QMB benefits;

 b. Specified Low-Income Beneficiaries (SLMB);
 i. including individuals who are classified
 as SLMB Plus and receive full Medicaid coverage in addition to SLMB
 benefits;

 c. Qualified
 Disabled and Working Individuals (QDWI); or

 d. Qualified Individuals (QI).

 Notes

 La. Admin.
 Code tit. 50 , §
 I-8103 

 Promulgated by the
 Department of Health and Hospitals, Office of the Secretary, Bureau of Health
 Services Financing,
 LR
 30:801 (April 2004), amended by the
 Department of Health and Hospitals, Bureau of Health Services Financing and the
 Office of Aging and Adult Services, LR 35:1891 (September 2009), amended by the
 Department of Health and Hospitals, Bureau of Health Services Financing, LR
 37:339 (January 2011). 

 AUTHORITY NOTE:
 Promulgated in accordance with
 R.S.
 36:254 and Title XIX of the Social Security
 Act. 

 State regulations are updated quarterly; we currently have two versions available.
 Below is a comparison between our most recent version and the prior quarterly release. 
 More comparison features will be added as we have more versions to compare.

 No prior version found.

 State Regulations Toolbox

 Accessibility 

 About LII 

 Contact us 

 Advertise here 

 Help 

 Terms of use 

 Privacy
