Source URL: https://www.law.cornell.edu/regulations/massachusetts/130-CMR-515-011
Retrieved: 2026-09-23

130 CMR, § 515.011 - Estate Recovery | State Regulations | US Law | LII / Legal Information Institute 

 Please help us improve our site!

 × 

 No thank you 

 Skip to main content 

 Cornell Law
 School 
 Search
 Cornell 

 Toggle navigation 

 Please help
 us improve our site! 

 Support Us! 

 Search 

 About
 LII 

 Who We Are 

 What We Do 

 Who Pays For This 

 Contact Us 

 Get the
 law 

 Constitution 

 Supreme Court 

 U.S. Code 

 CFR 

 Federal Rules 

 Federal Rules of Appellate Procedure 

 Federal Rules of Civil Procedure 

 Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure 

 Federal Rules of Evidence 

 Federal Rules of Bankruptcy Procedure 

 U.C.C. 

 Law by jurisdiction 

 State law 

 Uniform laws 

 Federal law 

 World law 

 Lawyer directory 

 Legal encyclopedia 

 Business law 

 Constitutional law 

 Criminal law 

 Family law 

 Employment law 

 Money and Finances 

 More... 

 Help out 

 Give 

 Sponsor 

 Advertise 

 Create 

 Promote 

 Join Lawyer Directory 

 LII 

 State Regulations 

 Massachusetts Regulations 

 130 CMR - DIVISION OF MEDICAL ASSISTANCE 

 130 CMR, 130 CMR 515.000 - Masshealth: General Policies 

 130 CMR, § 515.011 - Estate Recovery

 130 CMR, § 515.011 - Estate Recovery 

 State Regulations 

 Compare

 (A) 
 Introduction . (1) The
 MassHealth agency will recover the amount of payment for medical benefits
 correctly paid from the estate of a deceased member. Recovery is limited to
 payment for all services provided (a) while
 the member was 65 years of age or older, except on or after October 1, 1993,
 while the member was 55 years of age or older; and

 (b) on or after March 22, 1991, while the
 member, regardless of age, was institutionalized, and the MassHealth agency
 determined that the member could not reasonably be expected to return
 home.

 (c) Effective for dates of
 death on or after December 31, 2016, MassHealth will offset the estate recovery
 claim by the total of any premiums paid to the MassHealth agency on behalf of
 the member when the member was 55 years of age or older.

 (2) The estate includes all real and personal
 property and other assets in the member's probate estate.

 (3) Notwithstanding
 130
 CMR 515.011(A)(1) and in
 accordance with 42 U.S.C.
 1396p(b)(B) , the MassHealth
 agency will not recover Medicare cost-sharing benefits described at
 42 U.S.C.
 1396(a)(10)(E) with dates of
 payment on or after January 1, 2010, for persons who received such benefits
 under
 130
 CMR 505.002 : MassHealth
 Standard , 505.007: MassHealth Senior Buy-in and
 Buy-in ,
 130
 CMR 519.010 : MassHealth Senior Buy-in
 (Qualified Medicare Beneficiaries/OMB) , and
 130
 CMR 519.011 : MassHealth
 Buy-in . (a) The date of payment for
 Medicare cost-sharing deductibles, coinsurance, and copayments is the date the
 MassHealth agency received the claim.

 (b) The date of payment for premium payments
 is the date the MassHealth agency paid the premium.

 (B) 
 Exceptions . (1) 
 Long-term-care Insurance Exception . No recovery for
 nursing facility or other long-term-care services may be made from the estate
 of any person who meets the following requirements. 
 (a) The member was institutionalized;
 and

 (b) The member notified the
 MassHealth agency that he or she had no intent of returning home; and

 (c) On the date of admission to the
 long-term-care institution, the member had long-term-care insurance that, when
 purchased, or at any time thereafter, met the requirements of
 130
 CMR 515.014 and the Division of Insurance
 regulations at
 211
 CMR
 65.09(1)(e)(2) .

 (2) 
 Cost Effectiveness
 Exception . Effective for dates of death on or after May 14, 2021,
 in probate estates of members where the probate petition certifies under the
 penalties of perjury that the total assets in a member's estate are valued at
 $25,000 or less, MassHealth has determined that it is not cost effective to
 pursue recovery. In such estates, MassHealth waives its right to recovery, and
 will not file a claim or otherwise pursue recovery. MassHealth reserves the
 right to file a claim and recover in such estates if probate filings do not
 sufficiently identify the value of the estate or if later probate filings or
 proceedings or investigation identify or establish that the total assets in the
 estate exceed $25,000.00.

 (C) 
 Deferral of Estate
 Recovery . Recovery will not be required until after the death of a
 surviving spouse, if any, or while there is a surviving child who is younger
 than 21 years old, or a child of any age who is blind or permanently and
 totally disabled.

 (D) 
 Waiver of Estate Recovery Due to Undue Hardship . The
 MassHealth agency will waive its estate recovery claim if the agency determines
 that satisfaction of the claim would cause an undue hardship. An undue hardship
 does not exist solely because recovery will prevent any heir from receiving an
 anticipated inheritance. The duly court-appointed personal representative or
 public administrator of the deceased member's probate estate may apply for a
 waiver of estate recovery due to undue hardship. The application for a waiver
 and supporting documents must be received by the MassHealth agency within 60
 days of the agency's notice of claim. The types of Waivers of Estate Recovery
 Due to Undue Hardship are: (1) 
 Waiver of Estate Recovery Due to Residence and Financial
 Hardship . (a) For notice of
 claims presented on or after November 15, 2003, but before May 14, 2021,
 recovery will be waived if MassHealth determines all of the following
 conditions have been met. 1. a sale of real
 property would be required to satisfy a claim against the member's probate
 estate; and

 2. an individual who
 was using the property as a principal place of residence on the date of the
 member's death meets all of the following conditions: 
 a. the individual lived in the property on a
 continual basis for two years prior to the member's admission to an institution
 or death and continues to live in the property at the time the MassHealth
 agency first presented its claim for recovery against the deceased member's
 estate;

 b. the individual has
 inherited or received an interest in the property from the deceased member's
 estate as defined in
 130
 CMR 501.013(A)(2) and
 515.011(A)(2) ;

 c. the individual is not being forced to sell
 the property by other devisees or heirs at law; and

 d. at the time the MassHealth agency first
 presented its claim for recovery against the deceased member's estate, the
 gross annual income of the individual's family group was less than or equal to
 133% of the applicable federal-poverty-level income standard for the
 appropriate family size.

 3. The waiver will be conditional for a
 period of two years from the date the MassHealth agency mails notice that the
 waiver requirements have been met, or from the date that a court of competent
 jurisdiction determines that the waiver requirements have been met. If at the
 end of that period, all circumstances and conditions that must exist for the
 MassHealth agency to waive recovery still exist, including meeting the same
 income standards under
 130
 CMR 515.011(D)(1)(a)2 .(d),
 and the real property has not been sold or transferred, the waiver will become
 permanent and binding. If at any time during the two-year period, the
 circumstances and conditions for the waiver no longer exist, including meeting
 the same income standards under
 130
 CMR 515.011(D)(1)(a)2 .d.,
 the property is sold or transferred, or the individual does not use the
 property as their primary residence, the MassHealth agency will be notified and
 its claim may be payable in full.

 (b) For claims presented on or after May 14,
 2021, and upon application of a waiver of estate recovery due to residence and
 undue hardship by the personal representative or public administrator of the
 estate, MassHealth will waive recovery without a conditional two-year waiting
 period provided the personal representative or public administrator establishes
 to the satisfaction of the MassHealth agency that all the criteria for a
 residence and undue hardship waiver in
 130
 CMR 515.011(D)(1)(a)1 . and
 2. are currently met.

 (c) Any
 waivers arising out of notice of claims presented before May 14, 2021, which
 did not become permanent and binding pursuant to the two-year conditional
 requirements set forth in
 130
 CMR 515.011(D)(1)(a)3 ., and
 which had not been satisfied and were still subject to the two-year conditional
 requirements of
 130
 CMR 515.011(D)(1)(a)3 . as of
 May 14, 2021, will become permanent and binding.

 (2) 
 Waiver of Estate Recovery
 Based on Care Provided . For claims presented on or after May 14,
 2021, for an heir or devisee inheriting a legal interest in the deceased
 member's home, the MassHealth agency will waive estate recovery if MassHealth
 determines to its satisfaction all of the following conditions have been met. 
 (a) the heir or devisee resided in the
 member's home on a continual basis for two years prior to member's admission to
 an institution or death;

 (b) during
 that time, the member needed and the heir or devisee provided a level of care
 that avoided the member's admission to a facility;

 (c) the heir or devisee continues to live in
 the property at the time the notice of claim is filed;

 (d) the heir or devisee was left an interest
 in the home under the member's will, or inherited the property under the laws
 of intestacy;

 (e) the heir is not
 being forced to sell the property by other devisees or heirs; and

 (f) the property would have to be sold to
 satisfy the claim.

 (3) 
 Waiver of Estate Recovery Due to Financial Hardship Based on
 Income . (a) For claims presented
 on or after May 14, 2021, the personal representative or public administrator
 of a member's estate may apply for a waiver of estate recovery due to financial
 hardship based on the income of an heir or heirs or devisee or devisees. If
 there are multiple heirs or devisees, the personal representative or public
 administrator must apply for an Income-based waiver separately on behalf of
 each individual. To be considered a qualifying heir or devisee, the personal
 representative or public administrator of the estate must establish: 
 1. the qualifying heir or devisee is
 inheriting an interest in the member's estate under the member's probate
 estate; and,

 2. the family group of
 a qualifying heir or devisee has a Gross Income below 400% of the federal
 poverty level for the two-year period prior to the date the notice of claim is
 filed. If MassHealth determines that both conditions have been met, the heir is
 considered a qualifying heir.

 (b) MassHealth will waive recovery in an
 amount equal to the value of the qualifying heir's or devisee's interest in the
 estate up to a maximum of $50,000 per qualifying heir or devisee. If there is
 more than one qualifying heir or devisee in an estate, the total amount of the
 agency's estate recovery claim waived for qualifying heirs or devisees shall be
 limited to a total of $100,000.

 (c) 
 An estate with qualifying heirs or devisees, regardless of whether or not there
 are non-qualifying heirs, will be subject to estate recovery based on the
 lesser of: 1. the value of the estate
 remaining after deducting the amount waived from the total value of the estate
 for qualifying heirs and devisees; or

 2. the amount of the MassHealth claim
 remaining after deducting the amount waived from the total value of the
 MassHealth claim.

 (d) 
 Example 1 . The value of the estate is $400,000 and the
 MassHealth claim is $60,000. There are two heirs who qualify for the waiver,
 each with an interest in the estate of $50,000 or greater. There are also two
 heirs who do not qualify. In this example, the waived amount is $100,000
 (50,000 + 50,000). After deducting the $100,000 waived amount from the estate
 there is $300,000 left in the estate, but after deducting the $100,000 waived
 amount from the $60,000 MassHealth claim there is nothing left in the
 MassHealth claim. The result is no estate recovery.

 (e) 
 Example 2 . The
 value of the estate is $350,000 and the MassHealth claim is $500,000. There are
 two qualifying heirs, each with an interest in the estate of $50,000 or
 greater. There are also two non-qualifying heirs. In this example, the waived
 amount is $100,000 (50,000 + 50,000). After deducting the $100,000 waived
 amount from the estate there is $250,000 left in the estate, and after
 deducting the $100,000 waived amount from the $500,000 MassHealth claim there
 is $400,000 remaining in the MassHealth claim. In this example, MassHealth
 would recover $250,000, since it is less than $400,000.

 (E) 
 Outstanding
 Claims . (1) For claims presented
 between April 1, 1995, and November 15, 2003, that are still outstanding,
 recovery will be waived if all requirements under the then-existing MassHealth
 regulations were met.

 (2) For
 claims presented before April 1, 1995, a waiver for hardship did not
 exist.

 (F) 
 Fair-market Value and Equity Value . If there will be
 insufficient proceeds from the sale or transfer of the property to satisfy the
 MassHealth agency's claim in full from a property on which MassHealth has
 recorded a lien, the fair-market value and equity value of all real property
 that is part of the deceased member's probate estate must be verified prior to
 the sale or transfer of said property. (1) 
 The personal representative or public administrator of the probate estate must
 verify the fair-market value by sending to the MassHealth agency a copy of the
 most recent tax bill or the property tax assessment that was most recently
 issued by the taxing jurisdiction, provided that this assessment is not one of
 the following: (a) a special-purpose tax
 assessment;

 (b) based on a
 fixed-rate-per-acre method; or

 (c) 
 based on an assessment ratio or providing only a range.

 (2) The personal representative or public
 administrator of the probate estate must also provide a comparable market
 analysis or a written appraisal of the property value from a knowledgeable
 source. A knowledgeable source includes one of the following: a licensed
 real-estate agent or broker, a real-estate appraiser, or an official of a bank,
 savings and loan association, or similar lending organization. The
 knowledgeable source must not have any real or apparent conflict-of-interest
 relationship with the estate.

 (3) 
 The MassHealth agency may also obtain an assessment from a knowledgeable
 source.

 (G) 
 Exemption of Certain Assets from Estate Recovery for American
 Indians and Alaska Natives . (1) 
 For notice of claims presented on or after July 1, 2009, and upon application
 for exemption of certain assets from estate recovery by the personal
 representative or public administrator of the member's estate, recovery from
 the following American Indian and Alaska Natives income, resources, and
 property will be waived: (a) certain income
 and resources (such as interests in and income derived from tribal land and
 other resources currently held in trust status and judgment funds from the
 Indian Claims Commission and the U.S. Claims Court) that are exempt from
 Medicaid estate recovery by other laws and regulations;

 (b) ownership interest in trust and non-trust
 property, including real property and improvements 
 1. located on a reservation (any federally
 recognized Indian tribe's reservation, pueblo, or colony, including former
 reservations in Oklahoma, Alaska Native regions established by the Alaska
 Native Claims Settlement Act at 43 U.S.C. chapter 33 , and Indian allotments) or
 near a reservation as designated and approved by the Bureau of Indian Affairs
 of the U.S. Department of the Interior; or

 2. for any federally recognized tribe not
 described in
 130
 CMR 515.011(G)(1)(b)1 .,
 located within the most recent boundaries of a prior federal
 reservation;

 (c) income
 left as a remainder in an estate derived from property protected in
 130
 CMR 515.011(G)(1)(b) , that
 was either collected by an Indian or by a tribe or tribal organization and
 distributed to Indians, as long as the individual can clearly trace it as
 coming from protected property;

 (d) 
 ownership interests left as a remainder in an estate in rents, leases,
 royalties, or usage rights related to natural resources, including extraction
 of natural resources or harvesting of timber, other plants and plant products,
 animals, fish, or fish products, resulting from the exercise of federally
 protected rights and income either collected by an Indian or by a tribe or
 tribal organization and distributed to Indians derived from these sources as
 long as the individual can clearly trace it as coming from protected sources;
 or

 (e) ownership interests in or
 usage rights to items not covered by
 130
 CMR 515.011(G)(1)(a) through
 (d) that have unique religious, spiritual,
 traditional, or cultural significance or rights that support subsistence or a
 traditional life style according to applicable tribal law or custom.

 (2) Protection of non-trust
 property described in
 130
 CMR 515.011(G)(1) is
 limited to circumstances when it passes from an Indian, as defined in the
 Indian Health Care Improvement Act at 25 U.S.C. c. 18, § 4 to one or more
 relatives (by blood, adoption, or marriage), including Indians not enrolled as
 members of a tribe and non-Indians, such as spouses or stepchildren, that their
 culture would nevertheless protect as family members, to a tribe or tribal
 organization, or to one or more Indians.

 Notes

 130
 CMR , §
 515.011 

 Amended by
 Mass
 Register Issue 1275 , eff. 12/5/2014 . 
 Amended by
 Mass
 Register Issue 1443 , eff.
 5/14/2021 . 
 Amended by
 Mass
 Register Issue 1445 , eff.
 5/14/2021 . 
 Amended by
 Mass
 Register Issue 1486 , eff.
 1/6/2023 . 

 State regulations are updated quarterly; we currently have two versions available.
 Below is a comparison between our most recent version and the prior quarterly release. 
 More comparison features will be added as we have more versions to compare.

 No prior version found.

 State Regulations Toolbox

 Accessibility 

 About LII 

 Contact us 

 Advertise here 

 Help 

 Terms of use 

 Privacy
