Source URL: https://codes.findlaw.com/ma/part-i-administration-of-the-government-ch-1-182/ma-gen-laws-ch-118e-sect-31/
Retrieved: 2026-09-23

Massachusetts General Laws Part I. Administration of the Government (Ch. 1-182) Ch. 118E, § 31 | FindLaw 

 Skip to main content 

 Find a Lawyer 

 Find a Lawyer

 Legal Forms & Services

 Learn About the Law

 Learn About the Law

 Explore Legal Topics 

 Search Laws by State 

 Search Case Law 

 Search U.S. Codes 

 Legal Professionals

 Legal Professionals

 Legal Professional Resources 

 Law Firm Marketing 

 Blogs

 Find a Lawyer

 Search Legal Topics

 Begin typing to search, use arrow keys to navigate, use enter to select

 Legal Issue 

 More Options 

 Name Search

 Browse Legal Issues

 Browse Law Firms

 Support

 City, ZIP Code or County 

 Enter either your legal issue or location to continue

 Find a Lawyer 

 Search by Legal Topic

 Enter legal topic 

 Get the Information 

 CODES / 
 Massachusetts / 
 Part I. Administration of the Government (Ch. 1-182) / 
 Ch. 118E, § 31 

 Massachusetts General Laws Part I. Administration of the Government (Ch. 1-182) Ch. 118E, § 31

 Current as of January 01, 2025 | Updated by Findlaw Staff 

 (a) This subsection shall apply to estates of individuals dying prior to April first,
 nineteen hundred and ninety-five. There shall be no adjustment or recovery of medical assistance correctly paid except
 as follows:

 (1) Recovery from the Permanently Institutionalized: From the estate of an individual,
 regardless of age, who was an inpatient in a nursing facility or other medical institution
 when he or she received such assistance. Recovery of such assistance shall be limited to assistance provided on or after
 March twenty-second, nineteen hundred and ninety-one.

 (2) Recovery from Persons Age 65 and Over: From the estate of an individual who was
 sixty-five years of age or older when such individual received such assistance. Any recovery may be made only after the death of the surviving spouse, if any, and
 only at a time when such individual has no surviving child who is under age twenty-one
 or is blind or permanently and totally disabled. The division shall waive recovery where it would result in undue hardship, as defined
 by the division in its regulations.

 (b) This subsection shall apply to estates of individuals dying on or after April 1,
 1995 but not after July 31, 2024. There shall be no adjustments or recovery of medical assistance correctly paid except
 as follows:

 (1) Recovery from the Permanently Institutionalized: From the estate of an individual,
 regardless of age, who was an inpatient in a nursing facility or other medical institution
 when said individual received such assistance. Recovery of such assistance shall be limited to assistance provided on or after
 March 22, 1991.

 (2) Recovery from Persons Age 65 and Over: From the estate of an individual who was
 not less than 65 years of age when said individual received such assistance.

 (3) Recovery from Persons Age 55 and Over for Post-October 1, 1993 Medicaid: From the
 estate of an individual who was not less than 55 years of age when said individual
 received such assistance, where such assistance was for services provided on or after
 October 1, 1993.

 Recovery may be made only after the death of the surviving spouse, if any, and only
 at a time when such surviving spouse has no surviving child who is under 21 years
 of age or is blind or permanently and totally disabled. The division shall waive recovery if such recovery would work an undue hardship,
 as defined by the division in its regulations.

 (b 1 / 2 ) This subsection shall apply to estates of individuals dying on or after August
 1, 2024. There shall be no adjustments or recovery of medical assistance correctly paid except
 for recovery from the estate of an individual who was:

 (i) regardless of age, a resident in a nursing facility or other medical institution
 within the meaning of 42 U.S.C. 1396p(a)(1)(B)(i) when the individual received such assistance; provided, however, that recovery of
 such assistance shall be limited to assistance provided on or after March 22, 1991;
 or

 (ii) 55 years of age or older when the individual received such assistance, where such
 assistance was for services provided on or after October 1, 1993, but only for medical
 assistance consisting of nursing facility services, home and community-based services
 and related hospital and prescription drug services for which estate recovery is mandated
 under 42 U.S.C. 1396p(b)(1)(B)(i) or other federal law.

 Any recovery may be made only after the death of the surviving spouse, if any, and
 only at a time when the individual has no surviving child who is: (i) under the age
 of 21; or (ii) an individual who is blind or an individual with a disability.

 (c) For purposes of this section, “ estate ” shall mean all real and personal property and other assets includable in the decedent's
 probate estate under the General Laws.

 (d) The division is also authorized during an individual's lifetime to recover all assistance
 correctly provided on or after April 1, 1995, if property against which the division
 has a lien or encumbrance under section 34 is sold. No lien or encumbrance shall be valid against any bona fide purchaser for value
 or take priority against any subsequent mortgagee for value unless and until it is
 recorded in the registry of deeds where the property lies.

 Repayment shall not be required under this subsection while any of the following relatives
 lawfully resides in the property: (1) a sibling who had been residing in the property
 for at least one year immediately prior to the individual being admitted to a nursing
 facility or other medical institution; or (2) a child who (i) had been residing in
 the property for at least two years immediately prior to the parent being admitted
 to a nursing facility or other medical institution; and (ii) establishes to the satisfaction
 of the division that he provided care which permitted the parent to reside at home
 during that two year period rather than in an institution; and (iii) has lawfully
 resided in the property on a continuous basis while the parent has been in the medical
 institution.

 If repayment is not yet required because a relative specified above is still lawfully
 residing in the property and the individual wishes to sell the property, the purchaser
 shall take possession subject to the lien or the division shall release the lien if
 the individual agrees to (1) either set aside sufficient assets to satisfy the lien
 or give bond to the division with sufficient sureties and (2) repay the division as
 soon as the specified relative is no longer lawfully residing in the property. Notwithstanding the foregoing or any general or special law to the contrary, the
 division and the parties to the sale may by agreement enter into an alternative resolution
 of the division's lien.

 This subsection shall not limit the division's ability to recover from the individual's
 estate under subsection (a) or (b) or as otherwise provided under any general or special
 law.

 (e) Notwithstanding subsection (b 1 / 2 ), there shall be no adjustment or recovery of medical assistance correctly paid
 from the estate of an individual who was receiving such assistance under the CommonHealth
 program for adults with disabilities or for payment of personal care attendant services;
 provided, however, that the executive office shall seek federal authority, if required,
 to implement this subsection.

 Previous Part of Code 

 Next Part of Code 

 Back to Chapter List 

 Copy 

 Cite this article: FindLaw.com - Massachusetts General Laws Part I. Administration of the Government (Ch. 1-182) Ch. 118E, § 31 - last updated January 01, 2025  |
 https://codes.findlaw.com/ma/part-i-administration-of-the-government-ch-1-182/ma-gen-laws-ch-118e-sect-31/ 

 FindLaw Codes may not reflect the most recent version of the law in your jurisdiction. Please verify the status of the code you are researching with the state legislature before relying on it for your legal needs.

 Was this helpful? 

 Yes 

 No 

 Easy to understand 

 Solved my problem 

 Other 

 Missing the information I need 

 Too complicated / too many steps 

 Out of date 

 Other 

 Submit 

 Cancel 

 Search all Massachusetts Codes

 Keyword or Citation (Required)

 View Results 

 Welcome to FindLaw's Cases & Codes

 A free source of state and federal court opinions, state laws, and the United States Code. For more information about the legal concepts addressed by these cases and statutes, visit FindLaw’s Learn About the Law.

 Go to Learn About the Law 

 Did FindLaw Help You Understand This Legal Issue?

 Make It a Preferred Google Search Source

 Add to Google 

 Latest Blog Posts

 SEC Opens Door for Crypto-Style Trading of U.S. Stocks 

 A Third of Americans Can’t Name the Three Branches of Government. Here’s Why That Affects Your Rights. 

 Contract Buzz: Sixth Circuit Reversal Highlights Difficulty in Litigation Involving Cannabis 

 New Study: High Rates of Depression, Burnout Continue Among Attorneys 

 Explore all 

 For Legal Professionals

 Practice Management 

 Corporate Counsel 

 Legal Technology 

 Law Students 

 Learn About The Law

 Get help with your legal needs

 FindLaw’s Learn About the Law features thousands of informational articles to help you understand your options. And if you’re ready to hire an attorney,  find one in your area  who can help.

 Go to Learn About the Law 

 Need to Find an Attorney?

 Search our directory by legal issue

 Enter information in one or both fields (Required)

 Legal Issue

 More Options 

 Name Search 

 Browse Legal Issues 

 Browse Law Firms 

 Support 

 City, ZIP Code or County 

 Enter either your legal issue or location to continue 

 Find a Lawyer 

 Copied to clipboard

 Back to Top 

 Questions?

 At FindLaw.com, we pride ourselves on being the number one source of
 free legal information and resources on the web. 

 Contact us.

 Stay up-to-date with how the law affects your life. 

 Sign up for our consumer newsletter.

 ENTER YOUR EMAIL ADDRESS (Required)

 Thank you for subscribing!

 follow us: 

 ABOUT US 

 Our Team 

 Accessibility 

 Contact Us 

 FIND A LAWYER 

 By Location 

 By Legal Issue 

 By Lawyer Profiles 

 By Name 

 SELF-HELP RESOURCES 

 Legal Forms & Services 

 LEGAL RESEARCH 

 Learn About the Law 

 State Laws 

 U.S. Caselaw 

 U.S. Codes 

 LEGAL NETWORK 

 FindLaw.com : Free, trusted legal information for consumers and legal professionals 

 SuperLawyers.com : Directory of U.S. attorneys with the exclusive Super Lawyers rating 

 Abogado.com : The #1 Spanish-language legal website for consumers 

 LawInfo.com : Nationwide attorney directory and legal consumer resources 

 Copyright © 2026, FindLaw. All rights reserved.

 Terms 

 Privacy 

 Disclaimer 

 Cookies 

 Manage Preferences 

 Skip to main content
