Source URL: https://www.medicaid.gov/medicaid/spa/downloads/MA-21-0017.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-09-23
Note: PDF downloaded via WebFetch, text extracted with pdftotext

                                           Table of Contents

State/Territory Name: Massachusetts

State Plan Amendment (SPA) #: 21-0017

This file contains the following documents in the order listed:



1)      Approval Letter

2)      CMS-179

3)      Approved SPA Pages
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH & HUMAN SERVICES
Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services
601 E. 12th St., Room 355
Kansas City, Missouri 64106


Medicaid and CHIP Operations Group



August 1, 2021

MaryLou Sudders, Secretary
The Commonwealth of Massachusetts
Executive Office of Health and Human Services
Office of Medicaid
One Ashburton Place, Room 1109
Boston, MA 02108

Re: Massachusetts State Plan Amendment (SPA) 21-0017

Dear Secretary Sudders:

We reviewed your proposed Medicaid State Plan Amendment (SPA) submitted under transmittal
number (TN) 21-0017. This amendment proposes to XSGDWH WKH GHILQLWLRQ RI XQGXH KDUGVKLS IRU
HVWDWH UHFRYHU\ XSGDWH WKH VWDWH¶V GHWHUPLQDWLRQ RI FRVW HIIHFWLYHQHVV IRU HVWDWH UHFRYHU\ FODULI\
WKH SURFHVV IRU H[HPSWLQJ FHUWDLQ DVVHWV IURP HVWDWH UHFRYHU\ IRU $PHULFDQ ,QGLDQV DQG $ODVND
1DWLYHV DQG XSGDWH WKH OLPLWDWLRQV WR HVWDWH UHFRYHU\ IRU DQ\ SUHPLXPV SDLG RQ EHKDOI RI WKH
PHPEHU

We conducted our review of your submittal according to statutory requirements in Title XIX of
the Social Security Act and implementing regulations 42 CFR 433.36. This letter is to inform
you that Massachusetts Medicaid SPA Transmittal Number 21-0017 is approved effective May
14, 2021.

If you have any questions, please contact Marie DiMartino at 978-330-8063 or via email at
Marie.DiMartino@cms.hhs.gov.
                                            Sincerely,



                                              James G Scott, Director
                                              Division of Program Operations
Revision:   HCFA-PM-95-3 (MB)                                                           Attachment 4.17-A
May 1995                                                                                           Page 2
                          State Plan under Title XIX of the Social Security Act
                                      State: Massachusetts
                                      General Program Administration


                               Liens and Adjustments or Recoveries (cont.)

4.    For claims presented on or after November 15, 2003, but before May 14, 2021, the state defines
      undue hardship as follows:

      a.    If the sale of real property would be required to satisfy a claim, repayment is waived if an
            individual who was using the property as a principal place of residence on the date of the
            recipient’s death meets all of the following conditions: (1) the individual lived in the property
            on a continual basis for at least a year immediately prior to the recipient becoming eligible and
            continues to live in the property at the time the Commonwealth first presented its claim for
            recovery against the recipient’s estate; (2) the individual was left an interest in the property
            under the deceased recipient’s will, inherited the property under the laws of intestacy, or the
            recipient’s legal title or interest otherwise passes to the individual by operation of law; (3) the
            individual is not being forced to sell the property by other devisees or heirs; and (4) at the time
            the state first presented its claim, the annual gross income of the individual’s family group was
            less than or equal to 133% of the applicable poverty level income standard.

      b.    The waiver will be conditional for a period of two years from the date that the state or a court of
            competent jurisdiction determines that the waiver conditions have been met. If, at the end of
            that period, all circumstances and conditions that must exist for the state to waive recovery still
            exist and the real property has not been sold or transferred, the waiver will become permanent
            and binding. If at any time during the two-year period the circumstances and conditions that
            must exist for the state to waive recovery no longer exist, the state will be notified and the
            state’s claim will be payable in full.

            Any waivers arising out of notice of claims presented before May 14, 2021, which did not
            become permanent and binding pursuant to the two-year conditional requirements, and which
            had not been satisfied and were still subject to the two-year conditional requirements became
            permanent and binding as of May 14, 2021.

5.    For claims presented before November 15, 2003, that are still outstanding:

      a.    For claims presented between April 1, 1995 and November 15, 2003, that are still outstanding,
            recovery will be waived if all requirements under the then-existing regulations were met.

      b.    For claims presented before April 1, 1995, a waiver for hardship did not exist.

6. For claims presented on or after May 14, 2021, the state defines undue hardship as follows:

      a.    Waiver of Estate Recovery Due to Residence and Financial Hardship. Recovery will be waived
            if MassHealth determines all of the following conditions have been met:

            1) if the sale of real property would be required to satisfy a claim; and
            2) an individual who was using the property as a principal place of residence on the date of the
            member’s death meets all of the following conditions:




TN: 021-017                           Approval Date: 8/1/21                       Effective Date: 05/14/2021
Supersedes: 03-024
Revision:   HCFA-PM-95-3 (MB)                                                            Attachment 4.17-A
May 1995                                                                                          Page 2a
                          State Plan under Title XIX of the Social Security Act
                                      State: Massachusetts
                                      General Program Administration



                (a) the individual lived in the property on a continual basis for at least two years prior to the
                member’s admission to an institution or death and continues to live in the property at the
                time the MassHealth agency first presented its claim for recovery against the deceased
                member’s estate;
                (b) the individual has inherited or received an interest in the property from the deceased
                member’s estate;
                (c) the individual is not being forced to sell the property by other devisees or heirs at law;
                and
                (d) at the time the MassHealth agency first presented its claim for recovery against the
                deceased member’s estate, the annual gross income of the individual’s family group was
                less than or equal to 133% of the applicable poverty level income standard for the
                appropriate family size.

     b.     Waiver of Estate Recovery Based on Care Provided. For an heir or devisee inheriting a legal
            interest in the deceased member’s home, MassHealth will waive estate recovery if MassHealth
            determines to its satisfaction all of the following conditions have been met:

            1) the heir or devisee resided in the member’s home on a continual basis for two years prior to
               the member’s admission to an institution or death;
            2) during that time, the member needed and the heir or devisee provided a level of care that
               avoided the member’s admission to a facility;
            3) the heir or devisee continues to live in the property at the time the notice of claim is filed;
            4) the heir or devisee was left an interest in the home under the member’s will, or inherited the
               property under the laws of intestacy;
            5) the heir is not being forced to sell the property by other devisees or heirs; and
            6) the property would have to be sold to satisfy the claim.

     c.     Waiver of Estate Recovery Due to Financial Hardship Based on Income.

            1) The personal representative or public administrator of a member’s estate may apply for a
               waiver of estate recovery due to financial hardship based on the income of an heir or heirs
               or devisee or devisees. If there are multiple heirs or devisees, the personal representative or
               public administrator must apply for an Income-based waiver separately on behalf of each
               individual. To be considered a qualifying heir or devisee, the personal representative or
               public administrator of the estate must establish:
                 (a) The qualifying heir or devisee is inheriting an interest in the member’s estate under
                 the member’s probate estate; and
                 (b) The family group of a qualifying heir or devisee has a Gross Income below 400% of
                 the federal poverty level for the two year period prior to the date the notice of claim is
                 filed.
                 If MassHealth determines that both conditions have been met, the heir is considered a
                 qualifying heir.

              2) MassHealth will waive recovery in an amount equal to the value of the qualifying heir’s
                 or devisee’s interest in the estate up to a maximum of $50,000 per qualifying heir or
                 devisee. If there is more than one qualifying heir or devisee in an estate, the total amount


TN: 021-017                           Approval Date: 8/1/21                        Effective Date: 05/14/2021
Supersedes: NEW (03-024)
Revision:   HCFA-PM-95-3 (MB)                                                         Attachment 4.17-A
May 1995                                                                                       Page 2b
                         State Plan under Title XIX of the Social Security Act
                                     State: Massachusetts
                                     General Program Administration


             3) of the agency’s estate recovery claim waived for qualifying heirs or devisees shall be
                limited to a total of $100,000.

             4) An estate with qualifying heirs or devisees, regardless of whether or not there are non-
                qualifying heirs, will be subject to estate recovery based on the lesser of:
                (a) the value of the estate remaining after deducting the amount waived from the total
                value of the estate for qualifying heirs and devisees; or
                (b) the amount of the MassHealth claim remaining after deducting the amount waived
                from the total value of the MassHealth claim.

             5)    Example 1. The value of the estate is $400,000 and the MassHealth claim is $60,000.
                  There are two heirs who qualify for the waiver, each with an interest in the estate of
                  $50,000 or greater. There are also two heirs who do not qualify. In this example, the
                  waived amount is $100,000 (50,000 + 50,000). After deducting the $100,000 waived
                  amount from the estate there is $300,000 left in the estate, but after deducting the
                  $100,000 waived amount from the $60,000 MassHealth claim there is nothing left in the
                  MassHealth claim. The result is no estate recovery.

             6) Example 2. The value of the estate is $350,000 and the MassHealth claim is $500,000.
                There are two qualifying heirs, each with an interest in the estate of $50,000 or greater.
                There are also two non-qualifying heirs. In this example, the waived amount is $100,000
                (50,000 + 50,000). After deducting the $100,000 waived amount from the estate there is
                $250,000 left in the estate, and after deducting the $100,000 waived amount from the
                $500,000 MassHealth claim there is $400,000 remaining in the MassHealth claim. In this
                example, MassHealth would recover $250,000, since it is less than $400,000.




TN: 021-017                         Approval Date: 8/1/21                       Effective Date: 05/14/2021
Supersedes: NEW (03-024)
Revision:   HCFA-PM-95-3 (MB)                                                           Attachment 4.17-A
May 1995                                                                                           Page 3
                           State Plan under Title XIX of the Social Security Act
                                       State: Massachusetts
                                       General Program Administration


                               Liens and Adjustments or Recoveries (cont.)

7.    The following standards and procedures are used by the state for waiving estate recoveries when
      recovery would cause an undue hardship, and when recovery is not cost-effective: When the state
      presents its claim, it notifies the estate of the requirements for undue hardship and requests that the
      estate within 60 days submit verification and documentation that the individual meets the
      requirements set forth in #6 above. If the state disagrees with the estate’s contention that the
      requirements for undue hardship have been met, it files suit to enforce its claim and a Court makes the
      determination as to the state’s rights. Criteria for determining cost-effectiveness are set forth below
      and are considered on a case-by-case basis.

8.    The state defines cost-effective as follows (include methodology/thresholds used to determine cost-
      effective): In determining cost-effectiveness, the state considers the costs and availability of
      resources, the amount of its claim, the assets in the estate, and the likelihood of actual recovery.

      Effective for dates of death on or after May 14, 2021, in probate estates of members where the
      probate petition certifies under the penalties of perjury that the total assets in a member’s estate are
      valued at $25,000 or less, MassHealth has determined that it is not cost effective to pursue recovery.
      In Massachusetts, estates valued at $25,000 or less may be eligible for voluntary administration. After
      considering the likelihood of actual recovery, amount of recovery, staff time and cost incurred to
      pursue estate recovery in voluntary probate estates valued at $25,000 or less, MassHealth has
      determined that it is not cost effective to file a claim in such cases. MassHealth reserves the right to
      file a claim and recover in such estates if probate filings do not sufficiently identify the value of the
      estate or if later probate filings or proceedings or investigation identify or establish that the total
      assets in the estate exceed $25,000.


9.    The state uses the following collection procedures (include specific elements contained in the advance
      notice requirement, the method for applying for a waiver, hearing and appeals procedures, and time
      frames involved): with respect to claims filed against the recipient’s probate estate, the state may
      present its claim by filing notice with the Probate Court within four months of the executor or
      administrator being appointed or by filing a civil suit within one year of date of death; with respect to
      claims filed against any real and personal property and other assets not includable in the recipient’s
      probate estate, but in which the recipient immediately prior to death had any legal title or interest, the
      state may within one year of date of death or within four months of receipt of a complete estate asset
      form, give notice to the person or entity to whom the recipient’s legal title or interest passed, and in
      the case of real property, file a written notice of claim with the registry of deeds where the property
      lies. The state notifies the estate when it presents its claim of the requirements for undue hardship.
      (See #7 above.) If the estate disallows the state’s claim either because it does not believe the claim to
      be valid or because of hardship, the state has 60 days to file suit and a Court makes the determination
      of the state’s rights.

10.   The state uses the following procedure to exempt certain assets from estate recovery for American
      Indians and Alaska Natives: Upon application for exemption of certain assets from estate recovery by
      the personal representative or public administrator of the member’s estate, recovery from American
      Indian and Alaska Natives income, resources, and property will be waived:



TN: 021-017                           Approval Date: 8/1/21                       Effective Date: 05/14/2021
Supersedes: 03-024
Revision:   HCFA-PM-95-3 (MB)                                                           Attachment 4.17-A
May 1995                                                                                         Page 3a
                          State Plan under Title XIX of the Social Security Act
                                      State: Massachusetts
                                      General Program Administration




     a.     certain income and resources (such as interests in and income derived from tribal land and other
            resources currently held in trust status and judgment funds from the Indian Claims Commission
            and the U.S. Claims Court) that are exempt from Medicaid estate recovery by other laws and
            regulations;

     b.     ownership interest in trust and non-trust property, including real property and improvements:
            Waiver of Estate Recovery Due to Residence and Financial Hardship. Recovery will be waived
            if MassHealth determines all of the following conditions have been met:

              1) located on a reservation (any federally recognized Indian tribe’s reservation, pueblo, or
                 colony, including former reservations in Oklahoma, Alaska Native regions established by
                 the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act, and Indian allotments) or near a reservation as
                 designated and approved by the Bureau of Indian Affairs of the U.S. Department of the
                 Interior; or
              2) for any federally recognized tribe not described in 130 CMR 501.013(G)(1)(b)1., located
                 within the most recent boundaries of a prior federal reservation;

     c.     income left as a remainder in an estate derived from property protected in 130 CMR
            501.013(G)(1)(b), that was either collected by an Indian or by a tribe or tribal organization and
            distributed to Indians, as long as the individual can clearly trace it as coming from protected
            property;

     d.     ownership interests left as a remainder in an estate in rents, leases, royalties, or usage rights
            related to natural resources, including extraction of natural resources or harvesting of timber,
            other plants and plant products, animals, fish, or fish products, resulting from the exercise of
            federally protected rights and income either collected by an Indian or by a tribe or tribal
            organization and distributed to Indians derived from these sources as long as the individual can
            clearly trace it as coming from protected sources; or

     e.     ownership interests in or usage rights to items not covered by 130 CMR 501.013(G)(1)(a)
            through (d) that have unique religious, spiritual, traditional, or cultural significance or rights
            that support subsistence or a traditional life style according to applicable tribal law or custom.




TN: 021-017                           Approval Date: 8/1/21                       Effective Date: 05/14/2021
Supersedes: NEW (03-024)
Revision:   HCFA-PM-95-3 (MB)                                                                  Page 53c
            May, 1995                                                                         OMB No.:
                        State Plan under Title XIX of the Social Security Act
                                       State: Massachusetts



Citation                  4.17 Lien and Recoveries (cont.)

                               (c) Adjustments or Recoveries: Limitations

                                   The state complies with the requirements of section 1917 (b) (2) of
                                   the Act and regulations at 42 CFR §433.36 (h)-(i).

                                   (1)   Adjustment or recovery of medical assistance correctly paid
                                         will be made only after the death of the individual’s surviving
                                         spouse, and only when the individual has no surviving child
                                         who is either under age 21, blind, or disabled.

                                   (2)   With respect to liens on the home of any individual who the
                                         state determines is permanently institutionalized and who must
                                         as a condition of receiving services in the institution apply
                                         their income to the cost of care, the state will not seek
                                         adjustment or recovery of medical assistance correctly paid on
                                         behalf of the individual until such time as none of the
                                         following individuals are residing in the individual’s home:

                                         (a)   a sibling of the individual (who was residing in the
                                               individual’s home for at least one year immediately
                                               before the date that the individual was institutionalized),
                                               or

                                         (b)   a child of the individual (who was residing in the
                                               individual’s home for at least two years immediately
                                               before the date that the individual was institutionalized)
                                               who establishes to the satisfaction of the state that the
                                               care the child provided permitted the individual to reside
                                               at home rather than become institutionalized.

                                   (3)   No money payments under another program are reduced as a
                                         means of adjusting or recovering Medicaid claims incorrectly
                                         paid.

                                   (4)   With respect to dates of death on or after December 31, 2016,
                                         MassHealth will offset the estate recovery claim by the total of
                                         any premiums paid to the MassHealth agency on behalf of the
                                         member when the member was 55 years of age or older.




TN: 021-017                         Approval Date: 8/1/21                   Effective Date: 05/14/2021
Supersedes: 95-012
