Source URL: https://codes.findlaw.com/ma/part-ii-real-and-personal-property-and-domestic-relations-ch-183-210/ma-gen-laws-ch-203e-sect-505/
Retrieved: 2026-09-23

Massachusetts General Laws Part II. Real and Personal Property and Domestic Relations (Ch. 183-210) Ch. 203E, § 505 | FindLaw 

 Skip to main content 

 Find a Lawyer 

 Find a Lawyer

 Legal Forms & Services

 Learn About the Law

 Learn About the Law

 Explore Legal Topics 

 Search Laws by State 

 Search Case Law 

 Search U.S. Codes 

 Legal Professionals

 Legal Professionals

 Legal Professional Resources 

 Law Firm Marketing 

 Blogs

 Find a Lawyer

 Search Legal Topics

 Begin typing to search, use arrow keys to navigate, use enter to select

 Legal Issue 

 More Options 

 Name Search

 Browse Legal Issues

 Browse Law Firms

 Support

 City, ZIP Code or County 

 Enter either your legal issue or location to continue

 Find a Lawyer 

 Search by Legal Topic

 Enter legal topic 

 Get the Information 

 CODES / 
 Massachusetts / 
 Part II. Real and Personal Property and Domestic Relations (Ch. 183-210) / 
 Ch. 203E, § 505 

 Massachusetts General Laws Part II. Real and Personal Property and Domestic Relations (Ch. 183-210) Ch. 203E, § 505

 Current as of January 01, 2025 | Updated by Findlaw Staff 

 Creditor's claim against settlor

 (a) Whether or not a trust contains a spendthrift provision, the following rules shall
 apply:

 (1) During the lifetime of the settlor, the property of a revocable trust shall be subject
 to claims of the settlor's creditors.

 (2) With respect to an irrevocable trust, a creditor or assignee of the settlor may reach
 the maximum amount that can be distributed to or for the settlor's benefit and, if
 a trust has more than 1 settlor, the amount the creditor or assignee of a particular
 settlor may reach may not exceed the settlor's interest in the portion of the trust
 attributable to that settlor's contribution. Trust property shall not be considered distributable to or for the settlor's benefit
 solely because the trustee has the discretion under the terms of the trust to reimburse
 the settlor for any tax on trust income or capital gain that is payable by the settlor
 under the law imposing such tax; no creditor or assignee of the settlor of an irrevocable
 trust shall be entitled to reach any trust property based on the discretionary authority
 described in this sentence.

 (3) After the death of a settlor, and subject to the settlor's right to direct the source
 from which liabilities will be paid, the property of a trust that was revocable at
 the settlor's death shall be subject to claims of the settlor's creditors, the expenses
 of the settlor's funeral and disposal of remains and statutory allowances to a surviving
 spouse and children to the extent the settlor's probate estate is inadequate to satisfy
 those claims, expenses and allowances.

 <[ There is no subsection (b).]>

 Previous Part of Code 

 Next Part of Code 

 Back to Chapter List 

 Copy 

 Cite this article: FindLaw.com - Massachusetts General Laws Part II. Real and Personal Property and Domestic Relations (Ch. 183-210) Ch. 203E, § 505 - last updated January 01, 2025  |
 https://codes.findlaw.com/ma/part-ii-real-and-personal-property-and-domestic-relations-ch-183-210/ma-gen-laws-ch-203e-sect-505/ 

 FindLaw Codes may not reflect the most recent version of the law in your jurisdiction. Please verify the status of the code you are researching with the state legislature before relying on it for your legal needs.

 Was this helpful? 

 Yes 

 No 

 Easy to understand 

 Solved my problem 

 Other 

 Missing the information I need 

 Too complicated / too many steps 

 Out of date 

 Other 

 Submit 

 Cancel 

 Search all Massachusetts Codes

 Keyword or Citation (Required)

 View Results 

 Welcome to FindLaw's Cases & Codes

 A free source of state and federal court opinions, state laws, and the United States Code. For more information about the legal concepts addressed by these cases and statutes, visit FindLaw’s Learn About the Law.

 Go to Learn About the Law 

 Did FindLaw Help You Understand This Legal Issue?

 Make It a Preferred Google Search Source

 Add to Google 

 Latest Blog Posts

 SEC Opens Door for Crypto-Style Trading of U.S. Stocks 

 A Third of Americans Can’t Name the Three Branches of Government. Here’s Why That Affects Your Rights. 

 Contract Buzz: Sixth Circuit Reversal Highlights Difficulty in Litigation Involving Cannabis 

 New Study: High Rates of Depression, Burnout Continue Among Attorneys 

 Explore all 

 For Legal Professionals

 Practice Management 

 Corporate Counsel 

 Legal Technology 

 Law Students 

 Learn About The Law

 Get help with your legal needs

 FindLaw’s Learn About the Law features thousands of informational articles to help you understand your options. And if you’re ready to hire an attorney,  find one in your area  who can help.

 Go to Learn About the Law 

 Need to Find an Attorney?

 Search our directory by legal issue

 Enter information in one or both fields (Required)

 Legal Issue

 More Options 

 Name Search 

 Browse Legal Issues 

 Browse Law Firms 

 Support 

 City, ZIP Code or County 

 Enter either your legal issue or location to continue 

 Find a Lawyer 

 Copied to clipboard

 Back to Top 

 Questions?

 At FindLaw.com, we pride ourselves on being the number one source of
 free legal information and resources on the web. 

 Contact us.

 Stay up-to-date with how the law affects your life. 

 Sign up for our consumer newsletter.

 ENTER YOUR EMAIL ADDRESS (Required)

 Thank you for subscribing!

 follow us: 

 ABOUT US 

 Our Team 

 Accessibility 

 Contact Us 

 FIND A LAWYER 

 By Location 

 By Legal Issue 

 By Lawyer Profiles 

 By Name 

 SELF-HELP RESOURCES 

 Legal Forms & Services 

 LEGAL RESEARCH 

 Learn About the Law 

 State Laws 

 U.S. Caselaw 

 U.S. Codes 

 LEGAL NETWORK 

 FindLaw.com : Free, trusted legal information for consumers and legal professionals 

 SuperLawyers.com : Directory of U.S. attorneys with the exclusive Super Lawyers rating 

 Abogado.com : The #1 Spanish-language legal website for consumers 

 LawInfo.com : Nationwide attorney directory and legal consumer resources 

 Copyright © 2026, FindLaw. All rights reserved.

 Terms 

 Privacy 

 Disclaimer 

 Cookies 

 Manage Preferences 

 Skip to main content
