Source URL: https://www.law.cornell.edu/regulations/maryland/COMAR-10-09-24-15
Retrieved: 2026-09-23

Md. Code Regs. 10.09.24.15 - Liens, Adjustments, and Recoveries | State Regulations | US Law | LII / Legal Information Institute 

 Please help us improve our site!

 × 

 No thank you 

 Skip to main content 

 Cornell Law
 School 
 Search
 Cornell 

 Toggle navigation 

 Please help
 us improve our site! 

 Support Us! 

 Search 

 About
 LII 

 Who We Are 

 What We Do 

 Who Pays For This 

 Contact Us 

 Get the
 law 

 Constitution 

 Supreme Court 

 U.S. Code 

 CFR 

 Federal Rules 

 Federal Rules of Appellate Procedure 

 Federal Rules of Civil Procedure 

 Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure 

 Federal Rules of Evidence 

 Federal Rules of Bankruptcy Procedure 

 U.C.C. 

 Law by jurisdiction 

 State law 

 Uniform laws 

 Federal law 

 World law 

 Lawyer directory 

 Legal encyclopedia 

 Business law 

 Constitutional law 

 Criminal law 

 Family law 

 Employment law 

 Money and Finances 

 More... 

 Help out 

 Give 

 Sponsor 

 Advertise 

 Create 

 Promote 

 Join Lawyer Directory 

 LII 

 State Regulations 

 Maryland Code of Regulations 

 Title 10 - MARYLAND DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH 

 Part 2 

 Subtitle 09 - MEDICAL CARE PROGRAMS 

 Md. Code Regs. tit. 10, pt. 2, subtit. 09, ch. 10.09.24 - Medical Assistance Eligibility 

 Md. Code Regs. 10.09.24.15 - Liens, Adjustments, and Recoveries

 Md. Code Regs. 10.09.24.15 - Liens, Adjustments, and Recoveries 

 State Regulations 

 Compare

 A. Definitions. In this regulation, the
 following terms have the meanings indicated: 
 (1) "Dependent" means a: 
 (a) Child of the decedent, or the decedent's
 descendants;

 (b) Sibling, including
 half or step, of the decedent; or

 (c) Parent of the decedent, or the decedent's
 ancestors.

 (2) 
 "Discharge from a long-term care facility and return home" means the release of
 a person from that facility for the purpose of returning to the home for
 permanent residence.

 (3) "Equity
 interest in the home" means co-ownership of the home which is not the result of
 a transfer of the property for less than the fair market value within 2 years
 before institutionalization.

 (4) 
 "Estate" means all real and personal property and other assets included within
 an individual's estate, as defined for purposes of State probate law.

 (5) "Group health plan" means any plan,
 including a self-insured plan, of or contributed to by an employer to provide
 health care, directly or otherwise, to the employer's employees, former
 employees, or their families.

 (6) 
 "Incorrect payment of benefits" means payment of benefits to which a recipient
 is not entitled.

 (7) "Lawfully
 residing in the home" means residing in the home with the permission of the
 owner or, if under guardianship, the owner's legal guardian.

 (8) "Real property" means property which is
 fixed or immovable, such as land or a building.

 (9) "Residing in the home on a continuous
 basis" means using the home as the principal place of residence.

 (10) "Substantial hardship" means the
 Department's estate claim will result in the sale or transfer of the real
 property owned by the decedent and that the sale or transfer will result in the
 removal from the property of a dependent who: 
 (a) Resided in the property on the date of
 the decedent's death;

 (b) Has
 resided in the property continuously for a period beginning at least 2 years
 before the decedent's death; and

 (c) Cannot provide an alternate
 residence.

 A-1. The Department shall make a claim
 against income or resources, or both, of a recipient for benefits correctly
 paid, or to be paid, under the following circumstances: 
 (1) Under a court order;

 (2) In any situation in which a recipient has
 a cause of action against any person for medical expenses arising from that
 cause of action; or

 (3) As a result
 of payment by the Department for services for which health care coverage was
 available to a recipient.

 A-2. Liens. 
 (1) Incorrect Payments. Following a court
 judgment which has determined that benefits were incorrectly paid for a person,
 the Department shall impose a lien against the person's property, both personal
 and real, before the person's death, on account of Medical Assistance claims
 paid or to be paid on the person's behalf.

 (2) Correct Payments. Except as provided
 under §A-2(3) of this regulation, the Department shall impose a lien
 against the real property of a person, before the person's death, on account of
 Medical Assistance claims paid or to be paid on that person's behalf under the
 following circumstances: (a) The person owns
 real property, is a patient in a long-term care facility, and is required, as a
 condition of receiving Medical Assistance services, to spend for costs of
 medical care all but a minimal amount of his income required for personal
 needs; and

 (b) The Department has
 determined, after notice and opportunity for a hearing, that there is no
 reasonable expectation that the person can be discharged from the long-term
 care facility and return home.

 (3) Restrictions on Placing a Lien. The
 Department may not impose a lien on the home of an institutionalized individual
 under §A-2(2) of this regulation if any of the following individuals
 lawfully reside in the home. The institutionalized individual's: 
 (a) Spouse;

 (b) Child as defined in Regulation .02B of
 this chapter;

 (c) Son or daughter
 who is blind or disabled as defined in Regulation .05D and E of this chapter;
 or

 (d) Sibling, who has an equity
 interest in the home and who was residing in the home for a period of at least
 1 year immediately before the date of the institutionalized person's admission
 to a long-term care facility.

 (4) Termination of a Lien. Any lien imposed
 on a person's real property under §A-2(2) of this regulation will dissolve
 if the person is discharged from a long-term care facility and returns to the
 home.

 (5) Delay in the Imposition
 of a Lien. (a) When the imposition of a lien
 against a person's property is delayed because of the person's mental
 incompetence, eligibility may be granted pending the appointment of a legal
 representative for the person.

 (b) 
 The effective date of the lien shall be the date eligibility was
 granted.

 A-3. 
 Adjustments and Recoveries. (1) The Department
 shall seek recovery of Medical Assistance benefits correctly paid: 
 (a) From the estate of any individual who was
 55 years old or older when the individual received Medical Assistance benefits;
 and

 (b) From the estate or upon
 sale of the property on which a lien was imposed and which was owned by an
 individual described under §A-2(2) of this regulation.

 (2) The Department shall seek
 recovery under §A-3(1) of this regulation of Medical Assistance benefits
 correctly paid only: (a) After the death of
 the person's surviving spouse;

 (b) 
 When the individual has no surviving child as defined in Regulation .02B of
 this chapter;

 (c) When the person
 has no surviving son or daughter who is blind or disabled as defined in
 Regulation .05D and E of this chapter; and

 (d) In the case of liens imposed on a
 person's home under §A-2(2) of this regulation, when there is no: 
 (i) Sibling of the person lawfully residing
 in the home, who has resided there for a period of at least 1 year immediately
 before the date of the person's admission to a long-term care facility and who
 has lawfully resided there on a continuous basis since that time, or

 (ii) Son or daughter of the person lawfully
 residing in the home, who has resided there for a period of at least 2 years
 immediately before the date of the person's admission to a long-term care
 facility, who has lawfully resided there on a continuous basis since that time,
 and who can establish to the Department's satisfaction that he or she provided
 the care that permitted the person to reside in the home rather than in the
 facility.

 (3) 
 The Department may not seek recovery from the estate of a deceased individual
 under §A-3(1) and (2) of this regulation if, in the Department's judgment,
 substantial hardship exists.

 (4) 
 The Department may not seek recovery from the estate of a deceased individual
 for Medical Assistance payments of Medicare premiums, copayments, or
 deductibles.

 (5) The Department may
 not seek recovery from the estate of a deceased individual to the extent of the
 value of LTC partnership policy benefits furnished to the individual up to the
 time of death. B.-F. (text unchanged) 

 B. The Department shall accept reimbursement
 when voluntarily offered by a current or former recipient or someone acting on
 his behalf.

 C. Repealed.

 D. Extended Benefits Pending a Hearing
 Decision. (1) The local department of social
 services shall refer to the Medical Care Compliance Administration for
 reimbursement consideration all cases in which: 
 (a) A recipient received extended benefits
 pending a hearing and decision by the hearing officer; and

 (b) The hearing officer affirmed the decision
 of the local decision of the local department of social services.

 (2) The Medical Care Compliance
 Administration shall institute procedures to recover the cost of any
 expenditures made on behalf of a recipient in cases identified in §D(1) of
 this regulation. This provision may not apply to a person who requested a
 hearing and extended benefits resulting from a bona fide belief that the local
 department of social services has taken an adverse action
 erroneously.

 E. The
 local department of social services shall refer to the Medical Care Compliance
 Administration for investigation and other appropriate action all cases in
 which a recipient has received coverage erroneously as a result of the action
 or inaction of the recipient, representative, or person acting responsibly for
 the recipient.

 F. The Department
 shall investigate and take appropriate action in all cases in which eligibility
 has been incorrectly established as a result of the action or inaction of a
 recipient, representative, or person acting responsibly for the
 recipient.

 G. Assignment of
 Benefits, Release of Information, and Requirement of Cooperation by Recipient
 in Recovery Procedures. (1) A recipient of
 Medical Assistance is deemed to have created an authorization for the release
 to the Department of all data, records, and information by insurance companies,
 nonprofit health service plans, providers of medical care, employers, unions,
 governmental agencies, and any other agencies, organizations, or individuals
 necessary for the Department's pursuit of third-party reimbursement. The
 authorization extends to all information relevant to third-party reimbursement
 or third-party health care coverage.

 (2) The local department of social services
 shall take reasonable measures to identify and report to the Department on a
 form designated by the Department all possible third-party benefits available
 to persons determined eligible for Medical Assistance.

 (3) The Department shall collect available
 benefits from third parties determined liable to pay for services received
 under Medical Assistance.

 (4) A
 person who receives medical services that were or will be paid for by the
 Program is deemed to have made assignment to the Department of: 
 (a) His own rights to any medical care
 support available under an order of a court or an administrative agency, and
 any third-party payments for medical care; and

 (b) The rights of any other individual
 eligible under the plan, for whom he can legally make an assignment.

 (5) Assignment of rights to
 benefits does not include assignment of rights to Medicare benefits.

 (6) An applicant or recipient of Medical
 Assistance shall cooperate in: (a) 
 Establishing paternity for a child born out of wedlock for whom he can legally
 assign rights; and

 (b) Obtaining
 medical care support and payments for himself and any other individual for whom
 he can legally assign rights.

 (7) Waiver. 
 (a) The Department shall waive the
 requirements in §G(6) of this regulation if the Department, through the
 local department of social services, determines that the individual has good
 cause for refusing to cooperate.

 (b) With respect to establishing support
 paternity of a child born out of wedlock or obtaining medical care and payments
 for a child for whom the individual can legally assign rights, the Department,
 through the local department of social services, shall find that cooperation is
 against the best interests of the child if it is reasonably anticipated that
 cooperation will result in: (i) Physical harm
 to the child for whom support is to be sought;

 (ii) Emotional harm to the child for whom
 support is to be sought;

 (iii) 
 Physical harm to the parent or caretaker relative with whom the child is living
 which reduces the person's capacity to care for the child adequately;
 or

 (iv) Emotional harm to the
 parent or caretaker relative with whom the child is living, of such nature or
 degree that it reduces the person's capacity to care for the child
 adequately.

 (c) If at
 least one of the following circumstances exists, and the Department, through
 the local department of social services, believes that because of the existence
 of that circumstance, in the particular case, proceeding to establish paternity
 or secure support would be detrimental to the child for whom support would be
 sought, the Department, through the local department of social services, shall
 find that cooperation is against the best interests of the child: 
 (i) The child for whom support is sought was
 conceived as a result of incest or forcible rape;

 (ii) Legal proceedings for the adoption of
 the child are pending before a court of competent jurisdiction; or

 (iii) The applicant or recipient is currently
 being assisted by a public or licensed private social agency to resolve the
 issue of whether to keep the child or relinquish him for adoption, and the
 discussions have not gone on for more than 3 months.

 (d) If the Department of Human Resources has
 made a finding that good cause for refusal to cooperate does or does not exist,
 the Department shall adopt that finding as its own for this purpose.

 (e) With respect to obtaining medical care
 support and payments for an individual in any case not covered by §G(7)(b)
 or (c) of this regulation, the Department, through the local department of
 social services, shall find that cooperation is against the best interests of
 the individual or other person to whom Medical Assistance is being furnished,
 if it is reasonably anticipated that cooperation will result in reprisal
 against, and cause physical or emotional harm to, the individual or other
 person.

 (8) The
 Department, through the local department of social services shall: 
 (a) Deny or terminate eligibility for any
 applicant or recipient who refuses to cooperate as required under §G(6) of
 this regulation unless cooperation has been waived;

 (b) Provide Medical Assistance to any
 individual who: (i) Cannot legally assign his
 own rights, and

 (ii) Would
 otherwise be legally eligible for Medical Assistance but for the refusal by a
 person legally able to assign his rights or to cooperate as required by this
 regulation.

 (9) The assignment created by this regulation
 shall be effective as long as the recipient is eligible for Medical Assistance
 and remains effective for all services paid by the Program during this period
 of eligibility, and for those services which were erroneously provided to
 ineligible persons and paid for by the Program.

 H. An applicant for, or recipient of, Medical
 Assistance shall enroll, unless unable to do so on the applicant's own behalf,
 in a group health plan when the enrollment is determined by the Department to
 be cost-effective.

 I. Premiums may
 not be paid for employer group health insurance plans under the following
 circumstances: (1) The insurance plan is that
 of an absent parent;

 (2) The
 premium is used to meet a spend-down obligation; or

 (3) The insurance plan is designed to provide
 coverage only for a temporary period of time, less than 6 months, unless the
 household's anticipated medical expenditures are enough to make the policy
 cost-effective.

 Notes

 Md. Code
 Regs. 10.09.24.15 

 Regulations .15D amended as an emergency provision effective May
 1, 1983 (10:11 Md. R. 962); adopted permanently effective September 1, 1983
 (10:17 Md. R. 1521) 
Regulations .15 amended effective May 1, 1986
 (13:8 Md. R. 898) 
Regulation .15 amended effective August 8, 1988
 (15:16 Md. R. 1914); July 3, 1995 (22:13 Md. R. 967) 
Regulation .15
 amended as an emergency provision effective October 13, 1992 (19:22 Md. R.
 1979); amended permanently effective February 1, 1993 (20:2 Md. R. 113)

Regulation .15 amended as an emergency provision effective April 8,
 1994 (21:9 Md. R. 744); emergency provision rescinded retroactively to April 8,
 1994 (21:14 Md. R. 1226) 
Regulation .15A-3 amended as an emergency
 provision effective November 12, 2002 (29:24 Md. R. 1915); amended permanently
 effective February 17, 2003 (30:3 Md. R. 179) 
Regulations .15
 amended effective
 42:7
 Md. R. 568 , eff. 4/13/2015 

 State regulations are updated quarterly; we currently have two versions available.
 Below is a comparison between our most recent version and the prior quarterly release. 
 More comparison features will be added as we have more versions to compare.

 No prior version found.

 State Regulations Toolbox

 Accessibility 

 About LII 

 Contact us 

 Advertise here 

 Help 

 Terms of use 

 Privacy
