Source URL: https://www.medicaid.gov/State-resource-center/Medicaid-State-Plan-Amendments/Downloads/MI/MI-16-0005.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-09-23
Note: PDF downloaded via WebFetch, text extracted with pdftotext

                           Table of Contents
State/Territory Name:      MI
State Plan Amendment (SPA) #: 16-0005
This file contains the following documents in the order listed:
  1) Approval Letter
  2) CMS 179 Form/Summary Form (with 179-like data)
  3) Approved SPA Pages
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH & HUMAN SERVICES
Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services
Chicago Regional Office
233 N. Michigan
Suite 600
Chicago, Illinois 60601


                                            May 24, 2016



Chris Priest
Medical Services Administration
Michigan Department of Health and Human Services
400 South Pine Street, P.O. Box 30479
Lansing, Michigan 48909-7979

ATTN: Erin Black

Dear Mr. Priest:

Enclosed for your records is an approved copy of the following State Plan Amendment:

    Transmittal #: 16-0005 - Liens, Adjustments or Recoveries (Estate Recovery)
    Effective:     January 1, 2016

If you have any questions, please contact Leslie Campbell at (312) 353-1557 or
Leslie.Campbell@cms.hhs.gov.

                                    Sincerely,

                                            /s/

                                    Ruth A. Hughes
                                    Associate Regional Administrator
                                    Division of Medicaid & Children’s Health Operations

Enclosures
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES                                                                             FORM APPROVED
HEALTHCARE FINANCING ADMINISTRATION                                                                                OMB NO. 0938-0193
                                                                   1. TRANSMITTAL NUMBER:                        2. STATE:
 TRANSMITTAL AND NOTICE OF APPROVAL OF
                                                                   16 - 0005                                     Michigan
          STATE PLAN MATERIAL                                      3. PROGRAM IDENTIFICATION: TITLE XIX OF THE SOCIAL
 FOR: HEALTH CARE FINANCING ADMINISTRATION                            SECURITY ACT (MEDICAID)
                                                                   TITLE XIX OF THE SOCIAL SECURITY ACT (MEDICAID)
 TO:    REGIONAL ADMINISTRATOR                                     4. PROPOSED EFFECTIVE DATE
        HEALTH FINANCING ADMINISTRATION                            January 1, 2016
        DEPARTMENT OF HUMAN SERVICES
 5. TYPE OF PLAN MATERIAL (Check One):

               NEW STATE PLAN                   AMENDMENT TO BE CONSIDERED AS NEW PLAN                         AMENDMENT
                  COMPLETE BLOCKS 6 THRU 10 IF THIS IS AN AMENDMENT (Separate Transmittal for each amendment)
 6. FEDERAL STATUTE/REGULATION CITATION:                           7. FEDERAL BUDGET IMPACT:
 42 USC 1396p                                                         a. FFY 2016 $0
                                                                      b. FFY 2017 $0
 8. PAGE NUMBER OF THE PLAN SECTION OR ATTACHMENT:                 9. PAGE NUMBER OF THE SUPERSEDED PLAN SECTION
                                                                      OR ATTACHMENT (If Applicable):
 Page 53b
 Attachment 4.17-A, Pages 1,2,3,4,5                                Page 53b
                                                                   Attachment 4.17-A, Pages 1,2,3,4,5

 10. SUBJECT OF AMENDMENT:
 Clarifies language and ensures consistency with requirements set forth in federal statute regarding the definition of estate within
 the Liens and Adjustments or Recoveries section.


 11. GOVERNOR'S REVIEW (Check One):
              GOVERNOR'S OFFICE REPORTED NO COMMENT                            OTHER, AS SPECIFIED:
              COMMENTS OF GOVERNOR'S OFFICE ENCLOSED                           Chris Priest, Director
              NO REPLY RECEIVED WITHIN 45 DAYS OF SUBMITTAL                    Medical Services Administration

 12. SIGNATUE OF STATE AGENCY OFFICIAL:                        16. RETURN TO:


 13. TYPED NAME:
                                                               Medical Services Administration
 Chris Priest                                                  Actuarial Division - Federal Liaison
                                                               Capitol Commons Center - 7th Floor
 14. TITLE:                                                    400 South Pine
 Director, Medical Services Administration                     Lansing, Michigan 48933
 15. DATE SUBMITTED:
 March 15, 2016                                                Attn: Erin Black

                                                FOR REGIONAL OFFICE USE ONLY
 17. DATE RECEIVED:                                        18 DATE APPROVED:
                         March 15, 2016                                                     May 24, 2016
                                    PLAN APPROVED - ONE COPY ATTACHED
 19. EFFECTIVE DATE OF APPROVED MATERIAL:         20. SIGNATURE OF REGIONAL OFFICIAL:
                         January 1, 2016                                                            /s/
 21. TYPE NAME:                                                22. TITLE:
                    Ruth A. Hughes                                          Associate Regional Administrator
 23. REMARKS:




FORM HCFA-179(07-92)                              Instructions on Back
                                              53b
Revision: HCFA-PM-95-3      (MB)
          May 1995

                  STATE PLAN UNDER TITLE XIX OF THE SOCIAL SECURITY ACT
                  State:                MICHIGAN



Citation(s)

                                (4)      The State disregards assets or resources for individuals
                                         who receive or are entitled to receive benefits under a long
                                         term care insurance policy as provided for in Attachment
                                         2.6-A, Supplement 8b.

                                         The State adjusts or recovers from the individual’s estate
                                         on account of all medical assistance paid for nursing
                                         facility and other long term care services provided on
                                         behalf of the individual. (States other than California,
                                         Connecticut, Indiana, Iowa, and New York which provide
                                         long term care insurance policy-based asset and resource
                                         disregard must select this entry. These five States may
                                         either check this entry or one of the following entries.)

                                         In addition to adjustment or recovery of payments for
                                         services listed above, payments are adjusted or recovered
                                         for other services under the state plan as listed below:

                                         All services covered by the Michigan Medicaid program for
                                         individuals age 55 and over except Medicare cost-sharing
                                         identified at 4.17(b)(3).

                                         The State does not adjust or recover from the individual’s
                                         estate on account of any medical assistance paid for
                                         nursing facility or other long term care services provided
                                         on behalf of the individual.

                                         The State adjusts or recovers from the assets or
                                         resources on account of medical assistance paid for
                                         nursing facility or other long term care services provided
                                         on behalf of the individual to the extent described below:

                                         All assets and resources not otherwise excluded under
                                         this provision of the Michigan Medicaid Program.

                                         If an individual covered under a long-term care insurance
                                         policy received benefits for which assets or resources
                                         were disregarded as provided for in Attachment 2.6-A,
                                         Supplement 8c (State Long-Term Care Insurance
                                         Partnership), the State does not seek adjustment or
                                         recovery from the individual’s estate for the amount of
                                         assets or resources disregarded.



TN NO.: 16-0005               Approval Date: __5/24/16________        Effective Date: 1/01/2016

Supersedes
TN No.: 13-015
                                                                            Attachment 4.17-A
                                                                            Page 1

                  STATE PLAN UNDER TITLE XIX OF THE SOCIAL SECURITY ACT

                                            State of MICHIGAN

                                 Liens and Adjustments or Recoveries

1.   The State uses the following process for determining that an institutionalized individual cannot
     reasonably be expected to be discharged from the medical institution and return home:
     The State is not a TEFRA state. Determination of permanent institutionalization is not required or
     performed.
2.   The following criteria are used for establishing that a permanently institutionalized individual’s son or
     daughter provided care as specified under regulations at 42 CFR §433.36(f):
     Because 42 CFR §433.36(f) is a provision required only if a State chooses to impose a lien against
     an individual’s real property prior to his or her death, and the State is not a TEFRA state, the State
     does not have nor need such criteria.
3.   The State defines the terms below as follows:
         estate -
          MCL 700.1104(b) "estate" includes the property of the decedent, trust, or other person whose
          affairs are subject to this act as the property is originally constituted and as it exists throughout
          the administration. ("as the property is originally constituted and as it exists throughout
          administration" describes an asset that has changed forms. As an example: an individual has
          real estate which is sold in parcels and the proceeds from the sale of the separate parcels are
          invested in cds. Even though the asset is no longer in its original form, it is still part of the
          estate when the estate is distributed.) Additionally, the state’s estate recovery statute (MCL
          400.112h (a)) defines estate as ". . .All property and other assets included within an
          individual’s estate that is subject to probate administration. . ." If a decedent received (or is
          entitled to receive) benefits under a long-term care insurance policy and had assets or
          resources disregarded, pursuant to 42 USC 1396p(b)(4)(B) “estate” includes all real and
          personal property and other assets in which the decedent had any legal title or interest
          immediately before or at the time of death to the extent of that interest, including but not
          limited to, assets conveyed to a survivor, heir, or assign of the deceased individual through
          joint tenancy, tenancy in common, survivorship, life estate, living trust, transfer-on-death deed,
          payable on death contract, promissory note or other arrangement.
         Survivor - an individual who is entitled to inherit from the decedent’s estate, who does not
          predecease the deceased beneficiary
         individual’s home - any shelter used by an individual or spouse as a place of residence in
          which the individual has a home-ownership interest
         equity interest in the home - any equitable right, title or interest in real property
         residing in the home for at least one or two years on a continuous basis - occupancy of an
          individual’s home by a sibling, child or other survivor using the home as the principal place of
          residence
         discharge from the medical institution and return home - the attending physician has signed
          an order for discharge from the nursing home, following which the individual has returned to
          reside in his or her own home, and
         lawfully residing - use of the home of an individual residing in a nursing facility as a primary
          place of residence by a spouse, a minor, blind or disabled child, a sibling or other survivor.
          Such property must be the spouse’s, child’s, sibling’s or other survivor’s mailing address or
          legal address for driver’s licensure and/or voter registration.

TN NO.: 16-0005                   Approval Date:      5/24/16               Effective Date: 01/01/2016

Supersedes
TN No.: 12-10
                                                                           Attachment 4.17-A
                                                                           Page 2

                  STATE PLAN UNDER TITLE XIX OF THE SOCIAL SECURITY ACT

                                           State of MICHIGAN

                                 Liens and Adjustments or Recoveries

         Surviving spouse - a person who is still married to the decedent. A person who is a party to a
          judgment of separate maintenance or a judgment of divorce is not a surviving spouse for
          purposes of this section.

4.   The State defines undue hardship as follows:
     An undue hardship may exist when (1) the estate subject to recovery is the primary income
     producing asset of the survivors (where such income is limited), including, but not limited to, a family
     farm or business; OR (2) the estate subject to recovery is a home of modest value.
     There is a presumption that no hardship exists if the hardship resulted from estate planning
     methods under which assets were diverted in order to avoid estate recovery. The agency will not
     grant an undue hardship waiver if the granting of such waiver results in the payment of claims to
     other creditors with a lower priority standing.
     Home of modest value is defined as a home valued at fifty percent (50%) or less of the average
     price of homes in the county where the homestead is located, as of the date of the beneficiary’s
     death.
     For individuals who apply for but do not meet the definition of undue hardship as found in MCL
     §400.112g and provided above, the state will consider granting an exemption when a survivor who
     was residing in the deceased beneficiary’s home continuously for at least two years immediately
     before the beneficiary’s date of death, provided care that kept the deceased beneficiary out of an
     institution, even if the deceased beneficiary never entered an institution. This exemption will only be
     granted in circumstances where non-institutional long-term care services approved under the state
     plan were provided and only after the means test has been satisfied.
     The State is following its own definition of undue hardship in accordance with mcl §400.112g(3)(e).
     When considering whether to grant an undue hardship waiver, a means test will be applied. West
     Virginia v. Thompson, 475 F.3d 204. An applicant will satisfy the means test only if both of the
     following are true:
     Total household income of the applicant is less than 200 percent of the poverty level for a
     household of the same size; and
     Total household resources of the applicant do not exceed $10,000.
     Undue hardship waivers are temporary. Undue hardship waivers expire when the conditions which
     qualified an estate, or a portion of an estate, for a waiver no longer exist.

5.   The following standards and procedures are used by the State for deferring or waiving estate
     recoveries when recovery would cause an undue hardship, or when recovery is not cost-effective.
     Review of hardship waivers begins with the estate recovery caseworker. The caseworker reviews
     all incoming waiver applications and makes an initial recommendation to accept or deny and sends
     it to the estate recovery program manager.




TN NO.: 16-0005                   Approval Date:     5/24/16               Effective Date: 01/01/2016

Supersedes
TN No.: 12-10
                                                                          Attachment 4.17-A
                                                                          Page 3

                  STATE PLAN UNDER TITLE XIX OF THE SOCIAL SECURITY ACT

                                           State of MICHIGAN

                                Liens and Adjustments or Recoveries

     The Estate Recovery program manager’s responsibilities are:

         monitors state and federal laws and regulations pertaining to estate recovery
         conducts all initial hardship waiver reviews
         monitors progress of filed claims in probate
         assists caseworkers in sending notices of intent to file
         ensures adherence to applicable timeframes
         develops, tests, and implements TED, the Third Party Liability Electronic Database.
         approves all correspondence and informational materials
         coordinates with the Office of Legal Affairs and the Office of the Attorney General
         verifies information in recommendations received from the caseworker and in the waiver
          applications
         directs the activities of staff in pursuing recoveries
         evaluates methods for maximizing reimbursement from liable sources
         ensures adherence to state and federal laws and regulations
         approves or denies waiver applications

     The caseworker will use the following criteria when making an initial undue hardship waiver
     recommendation:

         whether the estate is the primary income-producing asset of the survivors
         whether the estate is a home of modest value
         whether an actual hardship exists after application of the means test

     TED is a module of the third party liability database that is used to process estate recovery cases.

6.   The State defines cost-effective as follows:

     Recovery is considered cost-effective when the potential recovery amount of the estate exceeds the
     cost of filing the claim or if the claim amount is above a $1,000 threshold.




TN NO.: 16-0005                   Approval Date:    5/24/16               Effective Date: 01/01/2016

Supersedes
TN No.: 12-10
                                                                            Attachment 4.17-A
                                                                            Page 4

                  STATE PLAN UNDER TITLE XIX OF THE SOCIAL SECURITY ACT

                                            State of MICHIGAN

                                 Liens and Adjustments or Recoveries

7.   The State uses the following collection procedures:

     The State identifies deceased recipients subject to estate recovery via a match with the Medicaid
     recipient eligibility file using data from the National Social Security Death Index and State Vital
     Statistics, and claims paid with a discharge status code indicating death. The match is run weekly.
     Deceased recipients are also identified by obtaining referrals from local MDHHS offices, service
     providers, long-term care facilities, attorneys, personal representatives, family members of
     recipients, and possibly by monitoring newly opened probate court records for high-population
     counties in Michigan.

     Under the Michigan Probate Code, a personal representative is required to publish notice to
     creditors to present their claims to the estate. The personal representative must send a copy of the
     published notice to all known creditors of the estate. A known creditor of the decedent is any
     creditor whose existence is reasonably ascertainable through an investigation of the decedent’s
     records for the 2 years prior to death. (MCL 700.3801(1)). The State will be a creditor ascertainable
     from review of the decedent’s past two years’ records; therefore, the State will be a known creditor
     and the personal representative will be required to send it notice of the probate estate.

     The personal representative is also required, by state law to:

     (1) within 91 days after appointment or other time specified by court rule, a personal representative,
     who is not a special personal representative or a successor to another representative who has
     previously discharged this duty, shall prepare an inventory of property owned by the decedent at the
     time of death, listing it with reasonable detail, and indicating as to each listed item, its fair market
     value as of the date of the decedent's death, and the type and amount of an encumbrance that may
     exist with reference to each listed item.
     (2) the personal representative shall send a copy of the inventory to all presumptive distributees and
     to all other interested persons who request it, and may also file the original of the inventory with the
     court. The personal representative shall submit to the court on a timely basis information necessary
     to calculate the probate inventory fee. (MCL 700.3706)

     The personal representative shall keep each presumptive distributee informed of the estate
     settlement. Until a beneficiary's share is fully distributed, the personal representative shall annually,
     and upon completion of the estate settlement, account to each beneficiary by supplying a statement
     of the activities of the estate and of the personal representative, specifying all receipts and
     disbursements and identifying property belonging to the estate. MCL 700.3703(4)

     (D)   that, during the course of administering the estate, the personal representative must provide
           all interested persons with all of the following:
           (i) a copy of the petition for the personal representative's appointment and a copy of the will, if
                 any, with the notice.
           (ii) a copy of the inventory.
           (iii) a copy of the settlement petition or of the closing statement.
           (iv) unless waived, a copy of the account, including, but not limited to, fiduciary fees and
                 attorney fees charged to the estate (MCL 700.3705).




TN NO.: 16-0005                    Approval Date:     5/24/16               Effective Date: 01/01/2016

Supersedes
TN No.: 12-10
                                                                            Attachment 4.17-A
                                                                            Page 5

                  STATE PLAN UNDER TITLE XIX OF THE SOCIAL SECURITY ACT

                                            State of MICHIGAN

                                 Liens and Adjustments or Recoveries

     Within 30 days of learning of the death of a Medicaid recipient who is subject to estate recovery,
     MDHHS mails a Notice of Intent (NOI) to the last known address of the decedent if a claim will be
     pursued. If a valid address is not known, a letter will be sent to the facility where the decedent last
     resided to request a family contact. The NOI indicates that the state intends to file a claim against
     the estate in probate court to seek reimbursement for payments made by the Medicaid program (not
     to exceed the value of the estate).

     The NOI also indicates that the State may defer recovery in the event that recovery would result in
     an undue hardship. The NOI provides the State’s definition of an undue hardship along with a
     contact phone number and address to request an undue hardship application. The NOI also
     advises that an undue hardship application may be downloaded from the estate recovery website
     and gives the url. Lastly, the NOI states that adverse decisions may be appealed under the
     Administrative Procedures Act, (MCL 24.201-24.328) within 60 days of receiving notice of the
     State’s final decision.

     Upon confirmation that a case does not meet any statutory exemptions or hardship conditions and
     that probate has been opened, the State files a claim against the estate and pursues recovery. The
     State’s estate recovery claim is administered through the State Probate Court system and all claims
     are subject to review by the Probate Court.

     The Probate Court’s allowance or denial of the State’s claim is subject to the appellate review
     available to all other Probate Court decisions.

     The State will petition a court pursuant to estates and protected individuals code, for distribution of
     estate assets upon determination that the personal representative has failed to distribute the
     proceeds of the estate in a timely manner (MCL §700.3415; 3807(1); 3951; 3952; 3953).

8.   The State assures CMS that the full FMAP share of all recoveries will be credited timely to CMS via
     the CMS-64 report.

     The State will provide CMS copies of the reports mandated by the Michigan Legislature. Such
     reports will be forwarded to CMS at the same time the reports are presented to the Legislature.




TN NO.: 16-0005                   Approval Date:      5/24/16               Effective Date: 01/01/2016

Supersedes
TN No.: 12-10
