Source URL: https://revisor.mo.gov/main/OneSection.aspx?section=473.399
Retrieved: 2026-09-23

Missouri Revisor of Statutes - Revised Statutes of Missouri, RSMo Section 473.399 

  ☰ Revisor of Missouri 

 Constitution 

 Committee 

 Publications 

 Other Links 

 Help / FAQ 

 Appendices and Tables 

 Words 
 Section 

 None 
 Or 
 And 
 Not 
 Near 

 Do search 

 Help 

 This chapter only 

 Title XXXI TRUSTS AND ESTATES OF DECEDENTS AND PERSONS UNDER DISABILITY

 Chapter 473 

 < 

 > 

 Effective - 28 Aug 1990     

   473.399.    Definitions - obligation to repay assistance, claim against estate, when - defenses, setoff - exceptions. - 1.  As used in this section, the following terms mean:

   (1)   "Assistance" , funds expended by a state agency to or on behalf of a person in the form of aid, care, or services, except that for the purposes of this section, aid to families with dependent children shall not be considered assistance;

   (2)   "Obligor estate" , the estate against which an obligation under this section arises;

   (3)   "Recipient" , a person to whom or on whose behalf assistance is provided;

   (4)   "State agency" , the department of social services, department of health and senior services and department of mental health of the state of Missouri.

   2.  For the purposes of this section, the providing of assistance shall create an obligation which may be recovered by filing a claim in the probate division of the circuit court against the decedent estate of the spouse of the deceased recipient upon such spouse's death as provided by the probate code of Missouri, chapters 472 , 473 , 474 and 475 .  The amount of the state debt shall be the full amount of assistance without interest provided to the recipient during the marriage of such recipient and spouse; provided that the liability of the obligor estate shall not exceed the value of the combined resources of the recipient and the spouse of the recipient on the date of death of the recipient.

   3.  The state agency providing the assistance may initiate a claim on the debt against the obligor estate.

   4.  The obligor estate may assert as a defense to the state agency's claim that more than two years prior to the providing of assistance, the recipient voluntarily abandoned the spouse.

   5.  An obligor estate shall have the right of setoff against the state debt for any amounts recovered by the state agency from the estate of the deceased recipient pursuant to section 473.398 .

   6.  Claims shall not be filed under this section when collection of the state debt would be contrary to federal statutes for assistance programs in which federal funds are received.

 ­­--------

 (L. 1990 H.B. 1725 § 1) 

 (2008) Section's definition of estate does not include all non-probate transfers and thus is insufficiently broad to allow recovery by State of Medicaid benefits from estate of recipient's surviving spouse.  In re Estate of Shuh, 248 S.W.3d 82 (Mo.App.E.D.). 

 (2008) Section authorizing State to receive reimbursement from Medicaid recipient's estate after recipient's death or from estate of recipient's spouse after death of spouse is preempted by federal statute.  In re Estate of Bruce, 260 S.W.3d 398 (Mo.App.W.D.). 

 ---- end of effective  28 Aug 1990 ---- 

 use this link to bookmark section  473.399 

 Click here for the Reorganization Act of 1974 - or - Concurrent Resolutions Having Force & Effect of Law 

 In accordance with Section 3.090 , the language of statutory sections enacted during a legislative session are updated and available on this website on the effective date of such enacted statutory section. 

 Other Information 

  Recent Sections 
 Editorials 
 May Be Cited As 
 Tables & Forms 
 Multiple Enact 

 Repeal & Transfer 

 Definitions 
 End Report 

 Site changes 
 Pictures 
 Contact 

 Other Links 

 Legislative Research 
 Oversight 
 MOLIS 

 Library 

 MO WebMasters 

 Missouri Senate 

 MO.gov 

 Missouri House 

 Errors / suggestions - WebMaster@LR.mo.gov 

 History and Fun Facts 

 ©Missouri Legislature, all rights reserved.
