Source URL: https://revisor.mo.gov/main/OneSection.aspx?section=461.025
Retrieved: 2026-09-23

Missouri Revisor of Statutes - Revised Statutes of Missouri, RSMo Section 461.025 

  ☰ Revisor of Missouri 

 Constitution 

 Committee 

 Publications 

 Other Links 

 Help / FAQ 

 Appendices and Tables 

 Words 
 Section 

 None 
 Or 
 And 
 Not 
 Near 

 Do search 

 Help 

 This chapter only 

 Title XXXI TRUSTS AND ESTATES OF DECEDENTS AND PERSONS UNDER DISABILITY

 Chapter 461 

 < 

 > 

 • 
 Effective - 28 Aug 1995     

   461.025.    Deeds effective on death of owner - recording, effect. - 1.  A deed that conveys an interest in real property to a grantee designated by the owner, that expressly states that the deed is not to take effect until the death of the owner, transfers the interest provided to the designated grantee beneficiary, effective on death of the owner, if the deed is executed and filed of record with the recorder of deeds in the city or county or counties in which the real property is situated prior to the death of the owner.  A beneficiary deed need not be supported by consideration or be delivered to the grantee beneficiary.  A beneficiary deed may be used to transfer an interest in real property to a trust estate, regardless of such trust's revocability.

   2.  This section does not preclude other methods of conveyancing that are permitted by law and that have the effect of postponing enjoyment of an interest in real property until the death of the owner.  This section does not invalidate any deed, otherwise effective by law to convey title to the interest and estates therein provided, that is not recorded until after the death of the owner.

 ­­--------

 (L. 1989 H.B. 145 § 25, A.L. 1994 S.B. 701, A.L. 1995 S.B. 116) 

 ---- end of effective  28 Aug 1995 ---- 

 use this link to bookmark section  461.025 

 Click here for the Reorganization Act of 1974 - or - Concurrent Resolutions Having Force & Effect of Law 

 In accordance with Section 3.090 , the language of statutory sections enacted during a legislative session are updated and available on this website on the effective date of such enacted statutory section. 

 Other Information 

  Recent Sections 
 Editorials 
 May Be Cited As 
 Tables & Forms 
 Multiple Enact 

 Repeal & Transfer 

 Definitions 
 End Report 

 Site changes 
 Pictures 
 Contact 

 Other Links 

 Legislative Research 
 Oversight 
 MOLIS 

 Library 

 MO WebMasters 

 Missouri Senate 

 MO.gov 

 Missouri House 

 Errors / suggestions - WebMaster@LR.mo.gov 

 History and Fun Facts 

 ©Missouri Legislature, all rights reserved.
