Source URL: https://medicaid.ms.gov/medicaid-coverage/member-services/estate-recovery/
Retrieved: 2026-09-23

Estate Recovery - Mississippi Division of Medicaid 

 Estate Recovery - Mississippi Division of Medicaid 

 Font Size

 -

 +

 MESA Portal for Providers   |   

 Select a page 

 About 

 Services 

 Managed Care 

 Quality 

 Late Breaking News 

 Job Openings 

 Contact 

 Innovation Models 

 Estate Recovery

 Mississippi Division of Medicaid > Medicaid Coverage > Member Services > Estate Recovery

 Effective July 1, 1994, Medicaid will seek recovery from the estate of deceased Medicaid recipients who are age 55 or older and in a nursing facility, or enrolled in a Home and Community Based Services Waiver Program at the time of death. Recovery will be made from any real or personal property in the estate of the recipient up to the value of payments made by Medicaid for nursing facility, hospital and drug services. Estate recovery will not apply to recipients who have a surviving spouse or dependent or disabled child.

 Estate Recovery fact sheet 

 Federal Law on Medicaid Estate Recovery

 Copyright(c) West Publishing Co. 1995 No claim to original U.S. Govt. works. | 42 USC 1396p 

 (b) Adjustment or recovery of medical assistance correctly paid under State plan

 (1) No adjustment or recovery of any medical assistance correctly paid on behalf of an individual under the State plan may be made, except that the State shall seek adjustment or recovery of any medical assistance correctly paid on behalf of an individual under the State plan in the case of the following individuals:

 (A) In the case of an individual described in subsection (a)(1)(B) of this section, the State shall seek adjustment or recovery from the individual’s estate or upon sale of the property subject to a lien imposed on account of medical assistance paid on behalf of the individual.

 (B) In the case of an individual who was 55 years of age or older when the individual received such medical assistance, the State shall seek adjustment or recovery from the individual’s estate, but only for medical assistance consisting of-

(i) nursing facility services, home and community-based services, and related hospital and prescription drug services, or

(ii) at the option of the State, any items or services under the State plan.

 (C)(i) In the case of an individual who has received (or is entitled to receive) benefits under a long-term care insurance policy in connection with which assets or resources are disregarded in the manner described in clause (ii), except as provided in such clause, the State shall seek adjustment or recovery from the individual’s estate on account of medical assistance paid on behalf of the individual for nursing facility and other long-term care services.

 (ii) Clause (i) shall not apply in the case of an individual who received medical assistance under a State plan of a State which had a State plan amendment approved as of May 14, 1993, which provided for the disregard of any assets or resources-

 (I) to the extent that payments are made under a long-term care insurance policy; or

 (II) because an individual has received (or is entitled to receive) benefits under a long-term care insurance policy.

 (2) Any adjustment or recovery under paragraph (1) may be made only after the death of the individual’s surviving spouse, if any, and only at a time-

 (A) when he has no surviving child who is under age 21, or (with respect to States eligible to participate in the State program established under subchapter XVI of this chapter) is blind or permanently and totally disabled, or (with respect to States which are not eligible to participate in such program) is blind or disabled as defined in section 1382c of this title; and

 (B) in the case of a lien on an individual’s home under subsection (a)(1)(B) of this section, when-

 (i) no sibling of the individual (who was residing in the individual’s home for a period of at least one year immediately before the date of the individual’s admission to the medical institution), and

 (ii) no son or daughter of the individual (who was residing in the individual’s home for a period of at least two years immediately before the date of the individual’s admission to the medical institution, and who establishes to the satisfaction of the State that he or she provided care to such individual which permitted such individual to reside at home rather than in an institution),

 is lawfully residing in such home who has lawfully resided in such home on a continuous basis since the date of the individual’s admission to the medical institution.

 (3) The State agency shall establish procedures (in accordance with standards specified by the Secretary) under which the agency shall waive the application of this subsection (other than paragraph (1)(C)) if such application would work an undue hardship as determined on the basis of criteria established by the Secretary.

 (4) For purposes of this subsection, the term “estate”, with respect to a deceased individual-

 (A) shall include all real and personal property and other assets included within the individual’s estate, as defined for purposes of State probate law; and

 (B) may include, at the option of the State (and shall include, in the case of an individual to whom paragraph (1)(C)(i) applies), any other real and personal property and other assets in which the individual had any legal title or interest at the time of death (to the extent of such interest), including such assets conveyed to a survivor, heir, or assign of the deceased individual through joint tenancy, tenancy in common, survivorship, life estate, living trust, or other arrangement.

 Mississippi Medicaid Estate Recovery Law

 Mississippi Code §43-13-317 

 (1) The division shall be noticed as an identified creditor against the estate of any deceased Medicaid recipient under Section 91-7-145.

 (2) In accordance with applicable federal law and rules and regulations, including those under Title XIX of the federal Social Security Act, the division may seek recovery of payments for nursing facility services, home- and community-based services and related hospital and prescription drug services from the estate of a deceased Medicaid recipient who was fifty-five (55) years of age or older when he or she received the assistance. The claim shall be waived by the division (a) if there is a surviving spouse; or (b) if there is a surviving dependent who is under the age of 21 years-old or who is blind or disabled; or (c) as provided by federal law and regulation, if it is determined by the division or by court order that there is undue hardship.

 Sources: Laws, 1994, ch. 649, §8; Laws, 2004, ch. 593, §7, effective from and after July 1, 2004. Sources: Laws, 1994, ch. 649, §8; Laws, 2004, ch. 593, §7, effective from and after July 1, 2004. 

 Home 

 About 

 Medicaid Coverage 

 Services 

 Resources 

 Provider Resources 

 Contact 

 The Mississippi Division of Medicaid responsibly provides access 
to quality health coverage for vulnerable Mississippians. 

 Mississippi Division of Medicaid

 P.O. Box 2222

Jackson, Mississippi 39225

Toll-free: 800-421-2408

Phone: 601-359-6050

 Search

 Policies

 Disclaimer and Terms of Service 

 Privacy and Security 

 Notice of Non-Discrimination 

 Transparency Mississippi 

 Helpful Links

 Mississippi's Official State website 

 Mississippi Legislature 

 Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services 

 Legislative Updates 

 Useful Tools

 Contact 

 Forms 

 Resources 

 Language Assistance 

 Job Openings 

 APIs 

 APIs

 Mississippi Division of Medicaid   |   Copyright @ 2019

 BACK TO TOP 

 <
 <
 <
 <
 <
 <
 <
 <
 <
 <
 <
 <
