Source URL: https://medicaid.ms.gov/wp-content/uploads/2014/01/Attachment_4.17-A.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-09-23

Revision:       HCFA-PM-95-3          (MB)                          Attachment 4.17-A
                MAY 1995                                                         Page 1
                STATE PLAN UNDER TITLE XIX OF THE SOCIAL SECURITY ACT
                  State/Territory :            Mississippi
                         LIENS AND ADJUSTMENTS OR RECOVERIES

1.       The State Division of Medicaid uses the following process for determining
         that an institutionalized individual cannot reasonably be expected to be
         discharged from the medical institution and return home:
         Mississippi does not have a lien law; therefore a determination of when
         an individual can reasonably be expected to be discharged is not
         applicable to this state.
2.       The following criteria are used for establishing that a permanently
         institutionalized individual's son or daughter provided care as specified
         under regulations at 42 CFR §433.36(£):
         The statement of primary care giver, collateral contacts, and/or
         documentation of recipient's medical history may be used to establish
         that a specified person rendered care enabling the recipient to stay at
         home rather than in an institution.
3.       The State Division of Medicaid defines the terms below as follows:
     o   estate - any real or personal property owned by the individual in its
         entirety or by shared ownership.
     o   individual's home - the recipient's residence prior to
         institutionalization in which he has an ownership interest.
     o   equity interest in the home - the money value of property or of an
         interest in that property in excess of any claims or liens against it.
     o   residing in the home for at least one or two years on a continuous basis
         - having possessions in that home, receiving mail at that address,
         sharing or paying all of the expenses, having no extended periods of
         absence, having no other place of residence.
     o   lawfully residing - being able to use dwelling as principal place of
         residence.                ·
4.       The State Division of Medicaid defines undue hardship as follows:
     a. the property is the sole income-producing asset of the survivors and such
        income is limited;

     b. an adult relative who is a recognized heir has lived in the home of the
        decedent, depended upon that home for his principal place of residence
        for at least one (1) year prior to the recipient entering the nursing
        facility, has remained in the house continually, either has or has not an
        equity interest in the property, and has given care so that the person
        was kept from entering the nursing facility during the year;
     c. the asset in the estate totals $5,000 or less and there is no prepaid
        burial contract or other money set aside for burial;
     d. the estate is of modest value as defined by the Secretary.




TN No.   95-13
Supersedes         Approval Date    11-21-95         Effective Date ____,7~--1~-~9~5--~-
TN No.   NEW   Date Received     9-21-95
Revision:    HCFA-PM-95-3       (MB)                                    Attachment 4.17-A
             MAY1995                                                               Page 2
                 STATE PLAN UNDER TITLE XIX OF THE SOCIAL SECURITY ACT
                   State/Territory:               Mississiopi


5.   The following standards and procedures are used by the State Division of
     Medicaid for waiving estate recoveries when recovery would cause an undue
     hardship, and when recovery is not cost-effective:
     The State Division of Medicaid receives notification of death from the
     Medicaid Regional Offices and the MMIS. Research is completed through use
     of the eligibility case file documentation and pertinent legal documents,
     tax receipts, etc. If there is evidence of undue hardship as defined in
     state/federal guidelines, no pursuit is affected. While the state will
     attempt to recover all amounts that are not waived for undue hardship,
     recovery is not deemed cost effective if the amount to be recovered is less
     than $2,000 or the value of the estate is less than 25 percent of the
     recovery amount if attempted recovery will require protracted litigation.
     The findings and conclusions are documented in physical and computer files.
6.   The State Division of Medicaid defines cost-effective as follows:
     While the State Division of Medicaid will attempt to recover all amounts
     that are not waived for undue hardship, recovery is not deemed cost
     effective if the amount to be recovered is less than $2,000 and protracted
     litigation is required to recover, or the value of the estate is less than
     25 percent of the recovery amount making Medicaid's potential recovery less
     than 25 percent of the recovery amount and protracted litigation will be
     required to recover. These thresholds are based on the legal time and
     expense involved in pursuing recoveries through the courts.
7.   The State Division of Medicaid uses the following collection procedures:
     If an estate exists, within 30 days of death date, a letter is mailed to
     survivor indicating the basic law, value of estate, Medicaid's recovery
     amount, dates of service, and explanation of fair hearing. The letter can
     be used by the survivor as a formal request to the Division of Medicaid for
     a fair hearing or to write an undue hardship explanation. If no response is
     received from the survivor within 15 days of the date of the notice, the
     case is referred to the Legal Unit which files in the proper court as a
     creditor of the estate or notifies the survivor in writing of Medicaid's
     recovery amount. If a request for a fair hearing is timely received, the
     hearing date is set within 10 days of receipt of request. The survivor is
     notified of hearing date at least 10 days prior to the date. The time for
     hearing may be extended if survivor has good cause; i.e., illness, failure
     to receive notice timely, being out of the state, or any other reasonable
     explanation. If good cause for filing a timely request is shown, a hearing
     request will be accepted. After the hearing occurs, the hearing officer
     forwards a transcript with recommended action to the Executive Director for
     a final decision. The Executive Director renders a decision which is sent
     to the survivor in writing. The survivor is entitled to seek judicial
     review in the court of proper jurisdiction. The Division of Medicaid must
     take final administrative action on a hearing within 90 days from the date
     of the hearing request. Hearing procedures have been promulgated and are
     available to the survivor upon request for a hearing.




TN No.   95-13
Supersedes             Approval Date   11-21-95        Effective Date        7-1-95
TN No.   NEW       Date Received

