Source URL: https://www.law.cornell.edu/regulations/montana/Mont-Admin-r-37.82.431
Retrieved: 2026-09-23

Mont. Admin. r. 37.82.431 - MEDICAID ESTATE RECOVERIES, WAIVER OF RECOVERY BASED UPON UNDUE HARDSHIP | State Regulations | US Law | LII / Legal Information Institute 

 Please help us improve our site!

 × 

 No thank you 

 Skip to main content 

 Cornell Law
 School 
 Search
 Cornell 

 Toggle navigation 

 Please help
 us improve our site! 

 Support Us! 

 Search 

 About
 LII 

 Who We Are 

 What We Do 

 Who Pays For This 

 Contact Us 

 Get the
 law 

 Constitution 

 Supreme Court 

 U.S. Code 

 CFR 

 Federal Rules 

 Federal Rules of Appellate Procedure 

 Federal Rules of Civil Procedure 

 Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure 

 Federal Rules of Evidence 

 Federal Rules of Bankruptcy Procedure 

 U.C.C. 

 Law by jurisdiction 

 State law 

 Uniform laws 

 Federal law 

 World law 

 Lawyer directory 

 Legal encyclopedia 

 Business law 

 Constitutional law 

 Criminal law 

 Family law 

 Employment law 

 Money and Finances 

 More... 

 Help out 

 Give 

 Sponsor 

 Advertise 

 Create 

 Promote 

 Join Lawyer Directory 

 LII 

 State Regulations 

 Montana Administrative Code 

 Department 37 - PUBLIC HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES 

 Chapter 37.82 - MEDICAID ELIGIBILITY 

 Subchapter 37.82.4 - General Non-Financial And Financial Eligibility Requirements for the Categorically Needy and the Medically Needy 

 Mont. Admin. r. 37.82.431 - MEDICAID ESTATE RECOVERIES, WAIVER OF RECOVERY BASED UPON UNDUE HARDSHIP

 Mont. Admin. r. 37.82.431 - MEDICAID ESTATE RECOVERIES, WAIVER OF RECOVERY BASED UPON UNDUE HARDSHIP 

 State Regulations 

 Compare

 (1) The department shall waive, in whole or
 in part, its claim under
 53-6-167 ,
 MCA, if the applicant demonstrates that recovery would result in an undue
 hardship to the applicant as provided in this rule.

 (2) An applicant may request an undue
 hardship waiver of estate recovery by filing an application on the form
 prescribed by the department. Application forms may be obtained from and must
 be filed with the Department of Public Health and Human Services, Quality
 Assurance Division, Third Party Liability, 2401 Colonial Drive, P.O. Box
 202953, Helena, MT 59620-2953. Application forms may also be obtained from
 county human services or welfare offices, but must be filed with the Quality
 Assurance Division office in Helena at the above address. 
 (a) The department may require the applicant
 to submit any information and documentation regarding the applicant's finances,
 property, employment, liabilities, expenses, and other matters relevant and
 necessary to determine whether an undue hardship would result from
 recovery.

 (3) The
 persons entitled to apply for an undue hardship waiver as provided in this rule
 are: (a) a person who has succeeded or would
 succeed to part or all of the decedent's assets but for recovery by the
 department, including a person who has received or would have received a
 beneficial interest in the assets but not legal title; or

 (b) a person who was, for a substantial
 period of time during the decedent's lifetime and after the decedent's death
 remains, dependent upon the decedent's assets for food, shelter, or
 clothing.

 (4) Department
 recovery will result in an undue hardship to the applicant if: 
 (a) The estate assets or property received by
 survival or distribution are part of a business, including a working farm or
 ranch, upon which the applicant was dependent for applicant's livelihood,
 during the decedent's lifetime recovery by the department would deprive the
 applicant of their sole means of livelihood, and the applicant has no other
 means of satisfying the department's claim;

 (b) The applicant is an aged (age 65 or
 over), blind or disabled relative of the decedent who for one year or more
 before the decedent's death had been continuously and lawfully living in a
 residence owned by the decedent and continues to reside there, and who would
 have significant difficulty establishing an alternative living arrangement,
 obtaining financing (such as a home equity loan) to repay the department or
 arranging other means to repay the department;

 (c) The applicant is a relative of the
 decedent who for one year or more before the decedent's death had been
 continuously and lawfully living in a residence owned by the decedent and
 continues to reside there, and who would have no means of providing or
 obtaining alternative shelter and there is no person legally responsible or
 assets otherwise available to provide the person shelter;

 (d) Without recovery by the department, the
 applicant would receive or be permitted to retain property that the applicant
 transferred to the decedent for no consideration, as determined by clear and
 convincing evidence including appropriate title documents, agreements and other
 documentation; or

 (e) The property
 that applicant would receive or be permitted to retain without recovery by the
 department is needed by the applicant to acquire necessities of life, such as
 food, shelter, clothing, or medical care and there are no other assets or means
 available to the applicant to satisfy in full or in part the department's
 claim.

 (5) An undue
 hardship does not exist if: (a) the decedent
 or applicant created the hardship by using estate planning, gifting or other
 methods to divert or shelter assets to avoid estate recovery; or

 (b) The circumstances indicate that the
 hardship was created for purposes of avoiding or defeating recovery.

 (6) The department may limit an
 undue hardship waiver to a partial or temporary waiver of recovery and/or may
 condition a waiver upon the applicant's agreement and provision of security for
 repayment in appropriate cases if the limited waiver would address reasonably
 the applicant's hardship.

 (7) To
 the extent that there currently is, or later comes into existence, a conflict
 between the provisions of this rule and standards promulgated by the Secretary
 of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, the federal standards
 shall control.

 (8) The department
 shall provide the applicant written notice of its determination on an
 application for an undue hardship waiver of estate recovery.

 (9) An applicant aggrieved by an adverse
 determination on an application for an undue hardship waiver of estate recovery
 may assert a claim of entitlement to an undue hardship waiver as provided in
 53-6-167(7)(c) ,
 MCA rather than through an administrative review, fair hearing or contested
 case hearing under the Montana Administrative Procedure Act or the department's
 rules.

 Notes

 Mont. Admin. r.
 37.82.431 

 NEW, 1995 MAR p. 2837,
 Eff. 12/22/95; TRANS, from SRS, 2000 MAR p.
 476. 

 53-6-167 ,
 53-6-189 ,
 MCA; IMP,
 53-6-167 ,
 MCA;

 State regulations are updated quarterly; we currently have two versions available.
 Below is a comparison between our most recent version and the prior quarterly release. 
 More comparison features will be added as we have more versions to compare.

 No prior version found.

 State Regulations Toolbox

 Accessibility 

 About LII 

 Contact us 

 Advertise here 

 Help 

 Terms of use 

 Privacy
