Source URL: https://policies.ncdhhs.gov/wp-content/uploads/ma-2240.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-09-23

North Carolina Department of Health and Human Services
North Carolina Medicaid
Division of Health Benefits
AGED, BLIND AND DISABLED MEDICAID MANUAL                                                 MA-2240

                                     TRANSFER OF ASSETS
                                REVISED 12/2/24 - CHANGE NO. 12-24
Change Notice No. 12-24
   • Section I - Transfer of Assets, home equity amount is updated to reflect current amount.
   • Section XII - Private Nursing Facility Rate
I.   INTRODUCTION

       When an individual, legal representative, or financially responsible spouse transfers any real
       property, personal property or any other assets, including assets counted or excluded in
       determining Medicaid eligibility, for less than current market value, a transfer of assets
       sanction may be imposed. If a sanction is imposed the individual is ineligible for certain
       Medicaid covered services.

       Transfer of asset regulations do not apply to all Medicaid covered services. Therefore, an
       individual under a transfer of assets sanction may be eligible for other services covered by the
       North Carolina Medicaid program.

       The services that can be sanctioned are: Institutional services which are provided to
       individuals who are in a nursing facility (NF), intermediate care facility for the mentally
       retarded (ICF-MR), swing bed or inappropriate level of care bed, Community Alternatives
       Program (CAP), or the Program of All-Inclusive Care for the Elderly (PACE). Additionally,
       certain non-institutional services may be sanctioned. These are in-home health services and
       supplies after the individual has been sanctioned for institutional services.

       This section contains the policy and procedures for determining the following:

       •   Individuals subject to the transfer of assets regulations,

       •   Medicaid covered services subject to the transfer of assets regulations,

       •   Assets subject to the transfer of assets regulations,

       •   The lookback date,

       •   When a non-allowable transfer has occurred,

       •   When to impose a transfer of assets sanction,

       •   How to determine the sanction period,

       •   Applicant/beneficiary (a/b) notification procedures.

       Refer to MA-2242, Home Equity Value and Eligibility for Institutional Services, for policy
       when determining eligibility for institutional services when an a/b has home equity in excess
       of $730,000. Refer to MA-2245, Undue Hardship Waiver for Transfer of Assets, for policy
       and procedures when an a/b alleges an application of a transfer of asset sanction would cause
       an undue hardship.
                                                      1
       A transfer of asset evaluation involves many dates that are important to both the current evaluation
       and possible future evaluations. Update at each review as needed.
II.    POLICY PRINCIPLE

       If an applicant/beneficiary, financially responsible spouse, or the a/b’s representative gives
       away or sells an asset, either countable or excluded, for less than its current market value, the
       a/b may be ineligible for payment of institutional services or in-home health services and
       supplies after being sanctioned for institutional services. This includes any direct or indirect
       method of disposing of an interest in an asset whether or not the asset would have been
       considered excluded or exempt at the time of its disposal or transfer.

       For a sanction to apply, the transfer must have occurred on or after a specific date (lookback
       date). The total, cumulative value of all uncompensated transfers made within the lookback
       period is treated as a single transfer and a single sanction period is calculated.

III.   DEFINITION OF TERMS RELATED TO TRANSFER POLICY

       Actuarially Sound - A promissory note, annuity, mortgage or loan established to pay off the
       entire asset value over the actual or expected lifetime of the annuitant/lender is actuarially
       sound. The annuitant/lender is expected to live long enough to receive an amount that is equal
       to or greater than the amount originally invested. The total amount of proceeds must be
       designed to be paid out in equal regular payments during the term of the agreement, with no
       deferral and no balloon payments.

       Annuity - An annuity is a type of trust. An individual pays an entity a lump sum of money in
       return for the right to receive fixed, periodic payments, either for life or a term of years. This
       includes the investment portion of a single premium pure endowment life insurance policy.

       Annuitant - An annuitant is the person who receives the income payments of an annuity
       policy at maturity date for life or for a specified period. The annuitant may or may not be the
       same as the owner.

       Annuitize - Converting a principal of an annuity into a series of payments.

       Asset - For purposes of transfer of assets is resources and income.

       Beneficiary of an annuity - The beneficiary is the person who receives any benefit that is
       paid upon death of the annuitant prior to the maturity date of the annuity.

       Compensation - Something received as payment for an asset. Payment is usually considered
       to be cash, but other forms of payment include in-kind income, real or personal property,
       support and maintenance, services, or assumption of a legal debt.




                                                      2
Cost of Care - The amount of money charged to an individual for NF or ICF-MR level of
care, a swing bed, or inappropriate level of care bed in a hospital, waiver services for the
Community Alternatives Program or Program of All-Inclusive Care for the Elderly (PACE).
Current Market Value - The value of an asset if sold on the open market. For real and
personal property, it is the tax assessed value of the property, unless that value is rebutted and
a different value established. Refer to MA-2230, Financial Resources, for instructions on
establishing and rebutting the tax value.

Demonstrated Hardship - The a/b, spouse or personal representative proves through the
greater weight of evidence that a denial of institutional services due to excess home equity
value will cause the a/b a demonstrated hardship.

Equity - The equity of real or personal property is the current market value (see definition
above) less any encumbrances (mortgages, liens, or judgments) on the property.

Greater Weight of the Evidence - Refers to the quality and convincing force of the evidence
rather than to the quantity of the evidence.

Homesite - When applying the transfer policy the homesite is defined as any property in
which the a/b or financially responsible person has an ownership interest and
•   Which is currently used (or during the lookback period was used) as his principal place of
    residence, or to which he intends (or intended) to return, or
•   Which is currently used (or during the lookback period was used), as the principal place of
    residence of his spouse or his dependent relative.

It includes the land the home sits on and all buildings and land contiguous to the home.
See MA-2230, Financial Resources, for the definition of homesite when determining resource
eligibility.

In-Home Health Services and Supplies - Medically necessary services provided to an
applicant/beneficiary (a/b) by a Medicaid certified provider can be sanctioned due to a
transfer of assets. These services include the following:

•   Durable Medical Equipment (DME) and related medical supplies such as wheelchairs,
    walkers, canes, hospital beds, oxygen and oxygen equipment, needed to maintain or
    improve a beneficiaries medical, physical, or functional level.
•   Home Health Services covers home health aide services, skilled nursing, physical therapy,
    speech pathology and audiology, and occupational therapy provided by a Medicaid
    certified home health agency to help restore, rehabilitate or maintain a beneficiary in the
    home.

Home Health Supplies include items such as adult diapers, disposable bed pads, catheter and
ostomy supplies provided by a Home Health or Private Duty Nursing (PDN) agency. PDN services
are not provided to individuals in an Adult Care Home (ACH).



                                               3
Home Infusion Therapy (HIT) covers self-administered therapies such as nutrition therapy (tube
feeding), drug therapy including chemotherapy for cancer treatments, antibiotic therapy and pain
management therapy.

•   Personal Care Services (PCS) are personal care activities such as bathing, toileting,
    monitoring vital signs, housekeeping and home management tasks essential for
    maintaining the beneficiaries’ health performed by an in-home aide in a private residence.

PCS services provided to individuals in an ACH are not subject to this policy.

Institutional Services - These services include services provided in a nursing facility (NF),
intermediate care facility for the mentally retarded (ICF-MR), swing bed or inappropriate level
of care bed, services provided through the Community Alternatives Program (CAP), or
Program of All-Inclusive Care for the Elderly (PACE). These services can be sanctioned due
to a transfer of assets. This does not include acute hospital care regardless of length of stay.

Institutionalized for Transfer of Assets - As defined for a transfer of assets review,
institutionalized is an individual receiving institutional services in a nursing facility (NF),
intermediate care facility for the mentally retarded (ICF-MR), swing bed or inappropriate level
of care bed in a hospital, services provided through the Community Alternatives Program
(CAP) or Program of All-Inclusive Care for the Elderly (PACE). This is different from the
definition of institutionalized for long term care budgeting or institutional living arrangement
when determining state/county residency.

Legal Representative - A person acting for and legally authorized to execute a contract for the
a/b, such as but not limited to a general guardian, guardian of the estate, parent of a minor
child, power of attorney, fiduciary (agent), conservator or any trustee managing the a/b’s
resources. Legal authorization requires a separate legal document except for parents of minor
children.

Lookback Date - The earliest date a transfer can occur and be evaluated for a transfer of
assets for less than fair market value. The lookback date varies depending on when an
individual applies for Medicaid, is admitted to a NF or ICF/MR or requests CAP or PACE
services. Sanctions can be determined for transfers that take place on or after the lookback
date.

Rebuttal - The process by which an a/b, the a/b’s spouse or legal representative proves
through a greater weight of evidence factors that eliminate or decrease a sanction period.

Remainder Beneficiary-The person(s) entitled to an annuity’s principal, possibly including
income that has been accumulated and added to principal, after the death of the annuitant.




                                              4
      Sanction Period - The period of time in which an a/b is ineligible for Medicaid payment of
      institutional services and in-home health services. In order to sanction in-home health services,
      the sanction period must have begun during a period the individual received institutional
      services and continues when the individual goes to private living arrangement (pla). The
      sanction period is also referred to as a penalty period.

      Transfer - To change ownership or title from one person(s) to another. A transfer also occurs
      when an individual takes action to waive or renounce assets or an inheritance to which he is
      entitled or when an individual takes any action that eliminates his ownership or reduces his
      control of an asset. For example, changing fee simple property to tenancy-in-common property
      or adding an additional owner to a savings account is considered a transfer.

      Transfer Date for Real Property or Interest in Real Property - The date of transfer for real
      property is the day the deed is signed by the grantor, delivered, and accepted by the grantee.
      Unless fraud is suspected, it is presumed this is the date recorded on the front of the deed. The
      deed does not have to be notarized or registered in order to be a valid title transfer. However, a
      deed of gift must be registered within 2 years to remain valid.

      Uncompensated Value - The difference between the market value less encumbrances (the
      equity) of the asset at the time of the transfer and any payment or compensation received.
      The uncompensated value is the amount upon which the sanction is based.

      Undue Hardship - The application of the sanction period would deprive the individual of
      medical care, such that the individual’s health or life would be endangered; or of food,
      clothing, shelter, or other necessities of life.

      Undue Hardship Waiver- An individual who incurs a sanction for transfer of assets and is
      denied or terminated from Medicaid payment of institutional services may request this
      sanction be waived and can demonstrate the sanction will cause the a/b an undue hardship.

IV.   TRANSFER OF ASSET RULES

      This section explains to whom transfer rules apply and what assets are considered in
      determining whether there is a transfer. It does not matter whether assets are owned jointly by
      the a/b and his spouse or whether the assets are owned individually by each spouse. It also does
      not matter whether assets were owned by one spouse prior to marriage.

      A. Apply transfer rules to assets transferred in the look back period by:

         1.      The applicant/beneficiary, or

         2.      The applicant/beneficiaries financially responsible spouse, or

         3.      Any person with authority to act in place of or on behalf of the a/b or the a/b's
                 spouse.



                                                    5
B. Apply transfer rules to a/b's requesting or receiving assistance with any of the
   following:

   1.    Institutional Services:

          a. Nursing facility (NF) or intermediate care facility for the mentally retarded
             (ICF-MR), or

          b. Swing bed or inappropriate level of care bed in a hospital, or

          c. CAP waiver programs (See MA-2280, Community Alternatives Program
             (CAP), Medicaid Eligibility) or

          d. Program of All-Inclusive Care for the Elderly (PACE).

                                                  OR

   2.     In-home health services and supplies after being sanctioned for institutional
          services, and a portion of the sanction period remains after the individual stops
          receiving institutional services.

C. Do Not apply transfer rules to:

   1.     Individuals who do not request or receive institutional services or in-home health
          services and supplies.
                                                  OR

   2.     Individuals who request or receive in-home health services and supplies and have
          not been sanctioned for prior institutional services.

                                                  OR

   3.     Individuals in acute care in a hospital, regardless of length of stay, who are
          discharged to pla or die without ever leaving acute care. Transfer rules do not
          apply even though long term care budgeting applies.

                                                  OR

   4.     Individuals in the psychiatric unit of a hospital.

                                                  OR

   5.     Children under age 21 admitted to a Psychiatric Residential Treatment Facility
          (PRTF),
                                                   OR
    6.     Individuals requesting MSB, MQB-B, MQB-E, MWD,
                                                   OR
                                              6
        7.       A married individual authorized for institutional services when the community
                 spouse (CUSP) transfers an asset.

     D. Apply transfer rules to the following:

        1.      Transfers of countable and excluded assets except for those listed under MA-2230,
                Financial Resources, I.A.6.

                Any real or personal property or liquid asset including vehicle, homesite, and
                tenancy-in-common or life estate interest in real property. Refer to VII., VIII., and
                IX. below for criteria for allowable transfers.

        2.      Transfers of income

                Income (including a lump sum) transferred in the month of receipt. It is not
                necessary to detail the a/b’s spending habits in the lookback period unless the a/b
                received a lump sum.

        3.      Purchases of life estates, including life estates in another individual’s home. Refer
                to IX. below for specific criteria to determine if a transfer occurred.

        4.      Purchase of promissory note, loan, or mortgage. Refer to IX. below for specific
                criteria to determine if a transfer occurred.

        5.      Purchase of an annuity. Refer to IX. below for specific criteria to determine if a
                transfer occurred.

V.   LOOKBACK DATE

     The lookback date is the earliest point in time on or after which all transfers of assets are
     reviewed for an a/b requesting or receiving institutional services. For applications on or after
     November 1, 2007, see V. A. to determine the starting point and V.B. to determine the
     lookback date. For applications prior to November 1, 2007, the lookback date is 36 months
     prior to the starting point, except for transfers to trusts and annuities, in which case the
     lookback date is 60 months prior to the starting point. Establish the lookback date following
     the procedures below. Two training guides, A Guide to Establish Lookback Dates and Sanction
     Periods, and Establish Starting Point/Lookback, are located at
     https://medicaid.ncdhhs.gov/counties/resources provide an overview and guide to determine
     the starting point and lookback dates.

     For those individuals with a lookback date established prior to November 1, 2007, that
     lookback date remains unchanged.

     A. Establishing the Starting Point for Determining the Lookback Date

        In order to determine the lookback date for individuals requesting institutional services,
        you must establish the starting point.

        1.      For individuals who first applied for Medicaid in any category on or after
                February 1, 2003, but prior to November 1, 2007, the starting point is the date of
                                                   7
          the first application for Medicaid.

   2.     For individuals who first applied for Medicaid in any category prior to February 1,
          2003 or on or after November 1, 2007, the starting point is the earliest date both of
          the conditions in a. and b. are met:

          a.     The a/b is institutionalized (See III. above for a definition of
                 institutionalized) or requests CAP or PACE, and

          b.     Applies for Medicaid.

          c.     Scenarios

                 (1)     If an individual is already a Medicaid applicant or beneficiary in
                         PLA when he is institutionalized, use the day he enters the institution
                         as the starting point to establish the lookback date.

                 (2)     If the a/b is already institutionalized as private pay when he applies
                         for Medicaid, use the date of the current application as the starting
                         point to establish the lookback date.

                 (3)     For individuals applying for the CAP or PACE programs, the
                         starting point is the date the a/b applies for Medicaid and requests
                         CAP or PACE.

                 (4)     If the a/b is an ongoing Medicaid beneficiary when he requests
                         CAP, the lookback date is based on the date the a/b is placed on
                         the CAP waiting list. If questionable, verify this date with the CAP
                         case manager.
B. Establish the Lookback Date for Transfers

   1.     If the starting point is prior to November 1, 2010, look back 3 years (36 months).
          Look back 5 years (60 months) in the case of assets transferred to trusts or
          annuities. If an annuity is transferred from one owner to another owner, look back 3
          years (36 months) from the starting point.

   2.     If the starting point is on or after November 1, 2010, but prior to November 1,
          2012, look back to November 1, 2007. In the case of assets transferred to trusts
          look back 5 years (60 months) from the starting point, which will be prior to
          November 1, 2007. If an annuity is transferred from one owner to another owner,
          look back from the starting point to November 1, 2007.

   3.     If the starting point is on or after November 1, 2012, look back 5 years for all
          transfers.

   4.     In situations involving an ISP and CUSP, where the CUSP later becomes
          institutionalized, determine the lookback date for the CUSP as follows:

          a. If CUSP is institutionalized prior to November 1, 2007, the lookback date is
             the same as the spouse’s.
                                                8
            b. If the CUSP is institutionalized November 1, 2007, or later, determine the
               starting point and lookback date independently from the ISP.

                              ESTABLISHING LOOKBACK DATE
                      Starting Point prior to Starting Point             Starting Point
                      11/1/2010               11/1/2010 or later, but    11/1/2012 or later
                                              prior to 11/1/2012
Lookback Date         3 years (36 months)     November 1, 2007 for       5 years prior to
                      prior to starting point most transfers; 5 years    starting point for
                      for most transfers; 5   prior to starting point    transfers of all types.
                      years (60 months) for for transfers to
                      transfers to            trusts/annuities.
                      trusts/annuities.

  C. The Lookback Date Never Changes

      1.    Once the lookback date is correctly established, it never changes.

            a. Evaluate all transfers beginning on or after the lookback date.

            b. Do not consider transfers made prior to this date.

            c. During the lookback period, the transfer of certain assets is sanctionable only
               when transferred on or after a specific date. Do not apply a transfer of assets
               sanction when the following assets are transferred prior to the date specified.
               A transfer sanction must be determined for all other non-allowable transfers
               within the lookback period. Refer to XII. below.

                               Asset                                      Date

      Income Producing Homesite Property                            October 1, 2001

      Tenancy-In-Common Property Interest                           December 1, 2002

      Non-Business Income Producing Property That Meets December 1, 2002
      The 6% Test

      Property That Produces Goods and Services For                 December 1, 2002
      Home Consumption

      Any Asset When A Non-CAP A/B Is Receiving In-                 February 1, 2003
      Home Health Services and Supplies

      Excluded Assets, including life estates                       November 1, 2007

      2.    Document the lookback date in the case record.

      3.    When there has been a transfer of assets on or after the lookback date, verify the
            following information based on policy rules in MA-2230, Financial Resources.
                                                9
                 a. A description of the asset transferred (the homesite, other real property, life
                    estate, remainder or tenancy-in-common interest in real property, cash, lump
                    sum, vehicles, stocks, bank account, certificate of deposit, etc.).

                 b. The person who transferred the asset (a/b, spouse, legal representative).

                 c. The name of the person(s) to whom the asset was transferred.

                 d. The a/b's relationship to the individual to whom the asset was transferred.

                 e. The value of the asset at the time of the transfer. See IX. below for
                    determining the value of a transferred asset.

                 f. The compensation (money or other benefit) received or expected from the
                    transferred asset.

                 g. The date the asset was transferred.

                 h. Whether the applicant was the sole owner of the asset at the time of the
                    transfer; if not, the name of any co-owners.

                 i. Whether the applicant still retains any ownership right in the asset reissued

VI.   EXPLORING TRANSFER OF ASSETS

      To determine if any transfers have occurred the county must explore all assets on all
      applications, redeterminations, and change in situations for individuals requesting or receiving
      institutional services. Evaluate the evidence presented by the applicant or the applicant’s
      representative concerning any asset transferred. The evidence might establish another reason
      for the transfer other than to establish or retain Medicaid eligibility.

      A. Verification

         1.      Request bank statements, investment accounts, and other financial documents that
                 can verify the a/b’s (and spouse’s) assets for the entire lookback period.

                 If requested information is unavailable, evaluate the information presented and
                 determine if the information provides a reasonable picture of the applicant’s
                 financial situation.

                 The county is responsible for obtaining this information if the a/b is unable to
                 provide it. However, it is the responsibility of the a/b to provide the agency with
                 enough information to pursue obtaining the required documentation. The county
                 must use the DSS-3431, Request for Financial Information, to request information
                 from the bank. In lieu of financial statements for the lookback period, the county
                 may choose to request any of the following information from the financial
                 institution.

                 a. At a minimum, a financial document for the month of application, the month
                                                   10
        prior to the month of application, and a financial document for the first and last
        month of the lookback period and each twelve months in between. These
        financial documents can be used to verify consistency in balances. If these exact
        months are not available, but the information provided is reasonably close,
        accept the information. You may request more information but not to the point it
        discourages the a/b.

     b. Highest and lowest balances for all accounts for the entire lookback period.
        The highest and lowest balances can be used to verify average balance. An
        extremely high balance may require further documentation from the a/b.

     c. Deposit information for deposits that do not appear regular and recurring.
        Irregular deposits may indicate other sources of income and/or assets.
        Pensions and SSA are regular and recurring deposits.

     d. The date accounts may have been closed during the lookback period and the
        amount of the closing withdrawal(s). This can be used to identify accounts
        closed during the lookback period and possibly the source of other deposits
        reissued.

     e. Do not deny if the a/b cooperated but it is determined information is not
        available. Accept the a/b’s statement or use whatever information is provided
        to determine eligibility.

2.   Check county records or request copies of deeds to show current or past ownership
     on all real property owned by the a/b or the a/b’s spouse.

3.   Obtain evidence to indicate a pattern of giving regarding regular donations/gifts to
     charities, religious organizations or family members. For example, the a/b regularly
     gives each family member $1,000 at Christmas and birthdays. A pattern of giving
     can indicate intent other than to qualify for Medicaid.

4.   Once the information is obtained, the IMC must examine the information for
     evidence a transfer may have occurred. Some potential indicators might be:

     a. The interest paid to date shows a substantial amount, but the current balance
        does not support payment of that interest.

     b. The balances in the past show substantially higher amounts than is currently in
        the account.

     c. DSS-3431 has been obtained from the bank, and it shows a substantial balance
        that is not currently in the account.

     d. The account shows a substantial withdrawal or withdrawals over a period of
        time.

5.   During the evaluation some potential questions to ask and consider that may be
     useful to determine if transfer occurs are:

                                      11
       a. What is the applicant’s age, general health, living arrangement, and amount of
          assets retained to meet future needs at the time of the transfer?

       b. Does the case record document any inquiry by the applicant, his spouse,
          representative, or other interested party about asset limits for Medicaid, long
          term care budgeting, etc.?

       c. Has the applicant consulted or hired an attorney for estate planning purposes?
          This may provide a contact person. If the individual saw an attorney this does
          not necessarily mean the client was trying to hide assets.

       d. Does the individual(s) who provided the knowledgeable statements stand to
          gain in any way from the transfer?

       e. Is there evidence of regular donations/gifts to charities, religious organizations
          or family members?

       f. Is there evidence of onetime gifts by an applicant who did not anticipate
          needing institutional services?

       g. Did the applicant attempt to dispose of the asset for its current market value?

 6.    If the county worker finds evidence to suspect a transfer may have occurred, the
       applicant or authorized representative must be questioned to secure an explanation
       and asked to provide additional information and documentary evidence as needed.

B. Documentation

  1.    Document the above information in a central location in the system.

  2.    Document the explanation of transfers of assets rules to the a/b when:

        a. Assistance with nursing home cost of care, CAP, or PACE is requested, or
        b. A transfer is reported, or

        c. When explaining right to a rebuttal/undue hardship.

  3.    Document all of the following when explaining:
        a. How the sanction is calculated, and
        b. Exceptions to the sanction, and
        c. How to lift or reduce the sanction period, and

        d. That in-home health services and supplies will be sanctioned is the a/b is no
           longer eligible for institutional services/CAP and the sanction period has not
           expired



                                         12
VII.   ALLOWABLE TRANSFERS (NON-TRUSTS)

       Certain transfers are allowed. DO NOT apply a sanction to the following transfers.

       A. Compensated Transfer
          Real or personal property or liquid assets or income that are transferred or exchanged in
          return for money or any other tangible object, service, or benefit that is equal to or greater
          than the equity of the transferred asset is a compensated transfer. Refer to IX. below, to
          evaluate transfers that may or may not be allowed.
          Some transfers that are adequately compensated may still be non-allowable transfers
          because of other requirements (e.g. annuities, purchases of life estates, etc.) and should be
          evaluated for a possible sanction.

       B. Transfer of the Homesite
          1.      When evaluating for transfers, the homesite is defined as any property in which the
                  a/b or financially responsible person has an ownership interest; and

                  a. Is used as his principal place of residence or the principal place of residence of
                     his spouse or a dependent relative, or

                  b. Was used as the principal place of residence by the a/b, his spouse or
                     dependent relative during the lookback period or

                  c. They intend to return to it or intended to return to it during the lookback period.

                     Once ownership is established by the a/b or financially responsible person in a
                     new principal place of residence, even if it occurs on or after the lookback date,
                     the former principal place of residence becomes non-homesite property.

                     Refer to MA-2230, Financial Resources, for the definition of the homesite and
                     contiguous property and for policy used to determine asset eligibility.

          2.      Evaluate the transfer of a homesite that was made income producing as a non-
                  allowable transfer. Transferring the homesite after it has been made income
                  producing is allowable only if it is transferred to a specified person as indicated in
                  VII.B.3. below.

          3.      Transfer of the homesite without receiving compensation of equivalent value is an
                  allowable transfer only when it is transferred to one of the following:

                  a. Legal spouse, or
                  b. Natural, adopted, or step child under 21 at time of transfer, or
                  c. Blind/disabled (determined by SSA) child of any age, or
                  d. Sibling who:

                                                     13
    C. Transfer to the Legal Spouse or Blind/Disabled Child

       1.     Any resource or income transferred (in addition to the transfer of the homesite
              described above) to the legal spouse or blind/disabled child of any age is
              allowable.

       2.     The blind/disabled child must have been determined blind/disabled according to
              SSA standards.

VIII. ALLOWABLE TRANSFERS TO A TRUST

    A. Transfers to a Trust For The "Sole Benefit" of an Allowable Person

       1.     Transfers by the a/b or any person with legal authority to act in place of or on
              behalf of the a/b to another party for the "sole benefit" of certain “allowable
              persons” may not be sanctioned.

       2.     An allowable person is:

              a. The a/b’s legal spouse, or
              b. The a/b’s blind/disabled (determined by SSA) natural, adopted, or step child of
                 any age, or

              c. Other unrelated disabled individual (determined by SSA) under age 65.

       3.     To be allowable, a transfer to a third party for the "sole benefit" must meet the
              following criteria:

              a. The asset cannot benefit anyone in any way but the allowable person at the
                 time of the transfer and in the future.

                 Trustee Rule: The trust may provide for reasonable compensation for a trustee
                 to manage funds. Reasonable compensation is based on the time involved to
                 manage the trust and the prevailing rate of compensation. Evaluate each
                 situation on a case-by-case basis to determine if the compensation is
                 reasonable.

              b. The transfer must be in the form of a trust document (or similar legal
                 document) which legally specifies the conditions under which the transfer was
                 made, who can benefit, and the amount of the benefit.

              c. The trust (or legal document) must provide that the transferred funds are spent
                 on behalf of the allowable person within his lifetime (except for Special Needs
                 and Pooled Trusts described below).

              d. Determine if the beneficiary is expected to live long enough to receive the
                 transferred funds based on his age at the time the trust is created and the
                 disbursement schedule of the funds. Use the Life Expectancy Table to
                 determine the beneficiary's life expectancy at the time of the transfer.
                                                14
                     (1)    If the funds will be spent on the beneficiary in his lifetime, it is an
                            allowable transfer.

                     (2)    Count as a transfer the portion of funds not expected to be disbursed to
                            the beneficiary.

         4.     The transferred assets/income is countable to the person for whose benefit the
                asset is intended if that person applies for Medicaid (or is part of a budget unit
                applying for Medicaid). Refer to MA-2230, Financial Resources.

      B. Transfers To Special Needs or Pooled Trusts

         1.     In addition to transfers to trusts for the "sole benefit" described in A. above,
                transfers of the a/b’s assets to a Special Needs or Pooled trust are an allowable
                transfer if made prior to the a/b turning age 65, and when the terms of the trust meet
                all the criteria in MA-2230, Financial Resources, XI. Any transfer made to a Special
                Needs Trust or Pooled Trust after the a/b turns age 65 must be evaluated as a
                Transfer of Assets.

                A Special Needs Trust may be established by the parent, grandparent, legal
                guardian, court or by the disabled individual. The disabled individual must
                establish the trust on and after December 13, 2016 to be a Special Needs Trust.
                Prior to the date, the trust will not be considered as a Special Needs Trust.

         2.     Forward a copy of the trust document to DMA, Third Party Recovery Section,
                2508 Mail Service Center, Raleigh, N.C. 27699-2508.

      C. Purchase of An Irrevocable Burial Contract

         Assets used to purchase an irrevocable burial contract are an allowable transfer and create a
         trust when:

         1.     The contract is purchased for the benefit of the a/b, his spouse, child under 21, or
                blind/disabled child of any age, and

         2.     The contract lists each burial item and/or service.

IX.   TRANSFERS THAT MAY OR MAY NOT BE ALLOWED

      A. Annuities

         Evaluate all annuities held by the a/b or the spouse of the a/b to determine if they are a
         resource. (See MA-2230, Financial Resources.) If the annuity is a countable resource, do
         not evaluate for transfer of assets sanction. If the annuity is not a resource, evaluate for a
         possible transfer of asset following policy below. Use the reference, Annuities, as a guide,
         located on the DHB Medicaid Training Resources.

         EXCEPTION: Annuities purchased or changed on or after November 1, 2007, must have
         North Carolina’s Medicaid program named as remainder beneficiary. If an annuity does not
                                                   15
and the a/b is otherwise eligible for Medicaid, evaluate for transfer of assets regardless of
their status as a resource. See IX.A.2. below.

The uncompensated value for sanctionable purchases of annuities that are purchased or
changed on or after November 1, 2007, is always the full purchase price.

1.     Annuities Purchased or Last Changed Prior to November 1, 2007

       a. Assets of the a/b (and those of the spouse of the a/b) used to purchase or change
          an annuity prior to November 1, 2007, are an allowable transfer when the
          annuity is not a resource and:

           (1)     The beneficiary of the annuity is the a/b or an allowable person
                   described in VIII.A., above.

           (2)     The beneficiary is expected to live long enough to receive an amount
                   that is equal to or greater than the amount originally invested to
                   purchase the annuity.

                   (a)     Use the Life Expectancy Table to determine how long the
                           beneficiary is expected to live based on his age at the time the
                           annuity is purchased. There is a different life expectancy table for
                           women and men. Round up or down to the nearest whole number.

                   (b)     Multiply the annual amount scheduled to be paid out by the
                           annuity by the number of years the beneficiary is expected to
                           live. Round to the nearest dollar. This is the amount that the
                           annuity is expected to pay out.

                   (c)     Compare this amount to the purchase price of the annuity.

                   (d)     When the amount that is expected to be paid out during the
                           beneficiary's life is equal to or greater than the purchase price of
                           the annuity, the a/b received fair market value for his investment.
                           This is an allowable transfer. Do not apply a sanction. (Also, see
                           IX.A.1.b. below.)

                   (e)     When the purchase price of the annuity is greater than the
                           amount that is expected to be paid out in the beneficiary's life,
                           the difference between the two amounts is an uncompensated
                           transfer.

       b. A transfer to an annuity may appear to be allowable in that the beneficiary is
          expected to live long enough to receive an amount that is equal to or greater
          than the amount originally invested. The disbursements must also be made as




                                          16
        a stream of income that stays constant or increases or decreases in regular
        intervals to assure original investment is paid out over the beneficiary’s
        lifetime. If disbursements are not made in this manner, the transfer may be
        non-allowable.

        For example, a person purchases an annuity that pays off in minimal amounts
        until the end of the person’s life expectancy when it pays off in the last month.
        This is a “balloon payment” and does not represent a stream of income that is
        constant or increases or decreases at regular intervals. Evaluate the purchase of
        the annuity as a transfer of assets.

     c. The transfer of an annuity from one owner to a non-allowable person is
        sanctionable. If the principal balance of the annuity was available to the a/b at
        the time of transfer, the uncompensated value is the amount of the principal
        balance. If the principal balance was not available to the a/b at the time of
        transfer, sanction the payments from the annuity as a stream of income.

2.   Annuities Purchased or Changed On or After November 1, 2007

     Annuities that are purchased or changed on or after November 1, 2007, and do not
     meet the criteria below are considered an uncompensated transfer for the amount of
     purchase plus any additions to the annuity. Determine a sanction period.

     a. The following requirements apply to all annuities whether they are determined
        to be a resource or not:

        (1)     The State of North Carolina’s Medicaid Program must be named
                remainder beneficiary in the first position for all annuities created or
                changed on or after November 1, 2007, when the a/b is applying for or
                receiving institutional services, CAP services, or PACE services. This
                requirement also applies to annuities held by the spouse of the a/b. Use
                the information obtained from the DHB-5111, Annuity Verification
                Form.

                (a)     If there is a community spouse and/or any child under age 21 or
                        a disabled child of any age when the purchase or change takes
                        place, the North Carolina Medicaid Program may be named in
                        the next position after those individuals.

                (b)     If the North Carolina Medicaid Program is not named as a
                        remainder beneficiary or not named in the correct position
                        within the time frames for providing necessary information, the
                        purchase or change to the annuity is a transfer of assets for the
                        amount of the original full purchase price plus any additions.
                        The amount the State of North Carolina Medicaid Program can
                        receive, as a beneficiary of a Medicaid beneficiaries’ annuities,
                        is limited to the amount that Medicaid paid on behalf of the
                        Medicaid beneficiary.

                                       17
   (2)     Changes include any action(s) taken by an individual that changes the
           course of payment of the annuity or that changes the treatment of the
           income or principal of the annuity. Changes include but are not limited
           to:

           (a)    Additions to principal

           (b)    Elective withdrawals

           (c)    Requests to change the distribution of the annuity

           (d)    Elections to annuitize the contract

                  Changes do not include address changes, death or divorce of a
                  remainder beneficiary, child turning 21 or changes beyond the
                  control of the individual such as change in the policy of the
                  issuer.

                  If the annuity is a countable resource, the a/b will likely be ineligible
                  for Medicaid due to excess resources. In this case no transfer of
                  assets sanction can be applied.

b. The following requirements apply to annuities not determined to be a resource:

   (1)     Assets of an a/b used to purchase or change an existing annuity on or
           after November 1, 2007, will not be treated as a transfer of assets if, in
           addition to North Carolina’s Medicaid program named as a beneficiary,
           the annuity meets the following conditions: (Note: This requirement
           does not apply to an annuity held by the a/b’s spouse)

           (a)    The annuity was sold by a bank, insurance company, or other
                  person engaged in the business of the sale of commercial
                  annuities.

                                               AND

           (b)    The annuity is considered either:

                  1)      An individual retirement annuity, or

                  2)      A deemed Individual Retirement Account (IRA) under a
                          qualified employer plan.

                                                OR

           (c)    The annuity is purchased with proceeds from one of the
                  following:




                                  18
                             1)      A traditional IRA; or

                             2)      Certain accounts or trusts which are treated as traditional
                                     IRAs; or

                             3)      A simplified retirement account; or

                             4)      A simplified employee pension account; or

                             5)      A Roth IRA.

                                     NOTE: To determine if an annuity is established under
                                     any of the provisions in a. and b. above, rely on
                                     verification from the financial institution, employer, or
                                     employer association that issued the annuity. The burden
                                     of proof is on the a/b or the a/b’s representative to
                                     produce this documentation.

                                                        OR

                      (d)    The annuity meets all of the following requirements:

                             1)      The annuity is irrevocable and does not allow the policy
                                     holder to assign or transfer the ownership or income of
                                     the policy to a third party; and

                             2)      The purchase price of the annuity is expected to be paid
                                     back in full during the actual or expected lifetime of the
                                     annuitant, (Follow procedures in IX.A.1.a.(2) above to
                                     determine if the beneficiary is expected to live long
                                     enough to receive full payments), and

                             3)      The annuity provides for payments in equal amounts
                                     during the term of the annuity, with no deferral and no
                                     balloon payments.

              (2)     Annuities that are purchased or changed on or after November 1, 2007,
                      and do not meet the criteria above are an uncompensated transfer for the
                      amount of purchase. Determine a sanction period.

B. Promissory Notes, Loans, Mortgages, or Other Property Agreements

   A promissory note, loan, mortgage, or other property agreement must have a fair market
   value at least equal to the value of the transferred asset. Consider a promissory note, loan,
   mortgage, or other property agreement that does not meet all the criteria below a transfer of
   assets.




                                            19
   Determine the sanction period using the remaining balance owed on the note, loan,
   mortgage, or other property agreement at the date of application for institutional services, or
   date CAP or PACE services are requested.

   1.      The purchase/establishment or receipt of a promissory note, loan, mortgage, or
           other property agreement on or after November 1, 2007, is considered an
           uncompensated transfer unless the repayment agreement meets the criteria below.

           a. The total value of the note, loan, mortgage, or other property agreement is
              expected to be paid back in full during the actual or expected lifetime of the
              lender/beneficiary,

               Use the Life Expectancy Table to determine the
               lender/beneficiary’s life expectancy at the time of purchase to determine if
               note, loan, mortgage, or other property agreement is expected to be paid back
               in full during the individual’s lifetime. Follow procedures in IX.A.1.a.(2)
               above,

                                                      And

           b. Repayment must be made in equal amounts during the term of the note, loan,
              mortgage, or other property agreement with no deferral payments and no
              balloon payments,

                                                      And

           c. The agreement prohibits the cancellation of the balance upon the death of the
              lender.

   2.      A purchase of a non-negotiable promissory note prior to November 1, 2007, is a
           transfer. Since it cannot be sold, it has no value and is therefore uncompensated,
           resulting in a sanctionable transfer. Reduce the sanction as payments are made.

C. Life Estate
   A life estate is a limited interest in real property. A life estate holder does not have full
   title to the property but has the right to use the property for his lifetime or for a specified
   period of time.

   1.      Exclude a life estate interest as an asset in determining eligibility for Medicaid.

   2.      Evaluate for transfer of assets when the a/b or the a/b’s spouse transfers real
           property and retains a life estate. (See IX.D. below for transfers of remainder
           interest in real property.)

           a. The date of transfer is the day the deed is signed by the grantor, delivered, and
              accepted by the grantee. (See XII.C. below)

           b. The uncompensated value is the equity of the remainder interest granted, less
              compensation received. Refer to MA-2230, Financial Resources, for

                                               20
        instructions on determining the equity value of a remainder interest.

3.   Evaluate for transfer of assets when an a/b or the a/b’s spouse transfers a life estate
     interest.

     a. The date of transfer is the day the deed is signed by the grantor, delivered, and
        accepted by the grantee. (See XII. below)

     b. Determine if fair market value was received for the life estate. Refer to the
        Life Estate and Remainder Interest Tables website,
        https://secure.ssa.gov/poms.nsf/lnx/0501140120.

     c. Multiply the tax value of the real property on the date the life estate is
        transferred by the corresponding life estate value for the age of the individual
        whose life determines the length of the life estate. The result is the value of the
        transferred life estate.

     d. Determine the sanction period. See XII. below.

4.   Evaluate the purchase of a life estate in another individual’s home for a transfer of
     asset sanction if the purchase date is on or after November 1, 2007, and

     a. At the time of application for institutional services the purchaser has not resided
        in the home for a period of at least 12 consecutive months following purchase of
        the life estate. The 12 months begins the date the purchaser moves into the
        home and ends on the 365th day.

        Vacations, overnight visits, and acute hospital stays should not be deducted
        from the 12 month period provided this continued to be the individual’s
        residence.

        (1)     Determine the sanction period based on the purchase price.

        (2)     Continue the sanction period until it is complete even if the person
                continues to reside in the home beyond 12 months.




                                        21
         b. They had resided in the home for at least 12 consecutive months following
            purchase of the life estate at the time of application for institutional services
            and the purchaser paid equal or more than fair market value of the life estate.
            Determine the sanction period based on the difference between the amount
            paid and the fair market value of the life estate. See IX.C.5. below to
            determine the uncompensated value.

   5.    Evaluate the purchase of a life estate in any property that is not the home of
         another individual.

         a. Count any amount paid over fair market value as a transfer.

         b. The value of the life estate at the time of purchase must at least equal the
            amount paid. The uncompensated value is the purchase price minus the value
            of the life estate at the time of purchase.
D. Remainder Interest in Real Property

   1.    When the a/b or the a/b’s spouse obtains a remainder interest in real property,
         determine if the value of the remainder interest is at least equal to the value of the
         compensation given in return.

         a. Determine if fair market value was received for the remainder interest.

         b. Multiply the tax value at the time the remainder interest was obtained by the
            remainder decimal factor that corresponds to the age of the individual whose
            life determines the length of the life estate. Subtract any encumbrances
            applicable to the remainder interest. Refer to the Life Estate and Remainder
            Interest Tables website. The result is the equity value of the transferred
            remainder interest.

         c. Compare the equity value of the remainder interest to the value of the
            compensation received. If the compensation received is less than the equity
            value of the remainder interest received, this is an uncompensated transfer.
            Refer to XII.C. below to determine the length of the sanction period.
         d. The date of transfer is the date the remainder interest is purchased.

   2.    When the a/b or the a/b’s spouse transfers a remainder interest in real property,
         whether or not a life estate interest was retained, evaluate to determine if the a/b or
         the a/b’s spouse received compensation at least equal to fair market value of the
         transferred remainder interest in real property.

E. Tenancy-in-Common Interest

   1.    When the a/b or the a/b’s spouse obtains a tenancy-in-common interest in real
         property, determine if the fair market value of the tenancy-in-common interest is at
         least equal to value of resources given by the a/b or the a/b’s spouse.

         a. Determine the value of the tenancy-common interest on the date it is obtained.
            Multiply the tax value of the property at the time of transfer by the tenancy-in-
                                            22
        common interest in the property.

     b. Multiply the amount of encumbrances on the property by the tenancy-in-
        common interest, and subtract this amount from the amount determined in a.
        above. The result is the fair market value of the tenancy-in-common interest.

     c. If the fair market value of the tenancy-in-common interest is less than the value
        of the compensation given by the a/b or a/b’s spouse, this is an uncompensated
        transfer. Refer to XII.C. below to determine the length of the sanction period.

     d. The date of transfer is the date the tenancy-in-common interest is obtained.

2.   When the a/b or the a/b’s spouse transfers a tenancy-in-common interest in real
     property, determine if the value of compensation received is at least equal to fair
     market value of the tenancy-in-common interest in real property.

     a. Determine the value of the tenancy-in-common interest or other fractional
        interest on the date of transfer/purchase. Multiply the tax value of the property
        at the time of transfer by the fractional interest in the property.

     b. Multiply the amount of encumbrances on the property by the fractional interest
        in the property and subtract this amount from the value determined in a. above.
        The result is the fair market value.

     c. If the compensation received is less than the fair market value of the tenancy-
        in-common interest, this is an uncompensated transfer. Refer to XII.C. below to
        determine the length of the sanction period.

     d. The date of transfer is the date the tenancy-in-common was transferred.

3.   Evaluate for transfer of assets when the a/b or a/b’s spouse changes ownership
     interest in property from fee simple or tenancy-by-the-entirety to tenancy-in-
     common interest.

     a. The uncompensated value is the equity in the tenancy-in-common interest less
        any compensation received.

     b. For Medicaid eligibility purposes, encumbrances on real property that is held by
        tenancy-in-common apply to the entire property. The equity in the tenancy- in-
        common interest in real property is:

        (1) The CMV of the property multiplied by the tenancy-in-common share,

        (2) Less the encumbrances on the property multiplied by the tenancy-in-
            common share.
     c. In the event there is an encumbrance that applies to only the tenancy-in-
        common interest, subtract the full amount of the encumbrance from the result
        of the CMV of the property multiplied by the tenancy-in-common share. If an
        encumbrance applies only to the other tenancy-in-common share, do not deduct
        from the a/b’s tenancy-in-common interest.
                                       23
F. Single Premium Endowment Policies

   The policy is an endowment investment instrument similar to an annuity that is not
   actuarially sound. The pure endowment policy pays a benefit only to those persons who
   survive a certain period of time. The policy has no cash value and payments are irregular or
   a balloon payment at maturity.
   The purchase of a single premium pure endowment policy is considered an uncompensated
   transfer. Count the total amount of the purchase price of the endowment policy as the
   uncompensated value of the transfer.

G. Regular Donations/Gifts

   A pattern of giving regular donations/gifts to charities, religious organizations or family
   members can indicate intent other than to qualify for Medicaid. For example, the a/b
   regularly gives each family member $1,000 at Christmas and birthdays. Do not impose a
   sanction when an asset was transferred solely for a reason other than to become eligible
   for Medicaid.

   1.     In making the determination, consider the following:

          a. The a/b’s or the a/b’s spouses’ age, general health, living arrangement, and
             amount of assets retained to meet future needs at the time of the transfer;

          b. How the a/b expected to meet his medical and other living expenses without
             the transferred asset;

          c. Whether the transfer by the a/b or the a/b’s spouse to a charity, religious
             organization, or family member was made when the a/b or the a/b’s spouse did
             not anticipate needing long term medical care.
   2.     Document the response provided to the considerations listed above. The a/b or the
          a/b’s spouse or the a/b’s or the a/b’s spouse’s representative must also provide a
          written description of the gifts/donations, including date, amount, and beneficiary.
   3.     In addition to the written evidence provided as listed above, evidence from other
          sources may be considered. Examples of other sources include but are not limited
          to bank records, medical records or oral or written statements from persons
          knowledgeable about the a/b’s or the a/b’s situation and the transfer of assets.
H. Personal Services and Continuing Care Contracts Signed on or After November 1, 2007
   This does not pertain to Continuing Care Retirement Communities (CCRC) that provides a
   continuum of care under a contract. See MA-2230, Financial Resources, X.Q. for policy
   concerning a CCRC. For personal services and continuing care contracts signed on or after
   November 1, 2007, the following applies.
   1.      Personal services and continuing care contracts are not asset transfers when the
           value of the transferred assets is an amount that is at least equal to the value of the
           services to be received and all of the following conditions are met.
          a. A written contract between the a/b or the a/b’s spouse and the provider of the
                                             24
        services is signed before services are delivered and payment made. The
        contract is dated and either party is able to terminate the contract; and
     b. The contract is signed by the a/b or the a/b’s spouse or a representative legally
        authorized through a power of attorney, general guardianship, or guardianship
        of the estate; and
     c. At the time the a/b or the a/b’s spouse receives services provided under the
        terms of a personal services contract, the a/b or the a/b’s spouse who is
        receiving the services is not residing in a nursing facility or intermediate care
        facility for the mentally retarded.
        However, the contract is a transfer of assets if:
        (1)     The a/b receives services under the terms of a personal services contract
                while he or she is residing in a nursing facility or intermediate care
                facility for the mentally retarded or
        (2)     The a/b’s spouse receives services under the terms of a personal
                services contract while he or she is residing in a nursing facility or
                intermediate care facility for the mentally retarded; and
     d. At the time the contract is signed, the services have been recommended in
        writing and signed by the a/b’s or the a/b’s spouse’s physician as necessary to
        prevent the entry of the a/b or the a/b’s spouse to a nursing facility or
        intermediate care facility for the mentally retarded. Such services may not
        include the providing of companionship, visits, or spiritual wellbeing; and

     e. The county department of social services verifies the agreement by reviewing
        the written contract between the a/b or the a/b’s spouse and the provider of the
        services. The contract must show the type, frequency and duration of the
        services being provided to the a/b or the a/b’s spouse and the amount of assets
        being transferred by the a/b or the a/b’s spouse to the provider of the services.
        If the amount of assets transferred in return for the services is greater than the
        fair market value of the services that can be expected to be received by the a/b
        or the a/b’s spouse under the terms of the contract, the a/b or the a/b’s spouse
        will be considered to have transferred the asset for less than fair market value.

        (1)    The uncompensated amount is the value of the transferred assets that
                exceeds the value of the services expected to be provided under the
                contract.

        (2)     Fair market value of the services expected to be provided to the
                individual or the individual’s spouse under the contract is established
                by the written statement of an area business which provides such
                services. If the services cannot be purchased on the open market or a
                business that provides the service cannot be located, use the state
                minimum wage amount.

2.   At application and at each redetermination of eligibility, the a/b or the a/b’s spouse
     or his representative must present to the county department of social services a
     statement from the provider of the services that documents the amount and type of
     services provided.
                                       25
         3.      Termination of the contract or failure to receive the services at the frequency and
                 value specified in the contract constitutes a transfer of assets for less than fair
                 market value. The uncompensated amount is the amount paid which exceeds the
                 fair market value of the services received.

         4.      If the a/b or the a/b’s spouse who has a personal services contract is admitted to a
                 nursing facility or intermediate care facility for the mentally retarded, from that
                 date forward any contract or the remainder of an existing contract is considered a
                 transfer of assets for less than fair market value. The uncompensated amount is the
                 amount paid which exceeds the fair market value of the services received.

      I. Transfers for "Love and Consideration"

         1.      Evaluate for transfer of assets when an a/b gives cash or other assets to a family
                 member, relative, or friend for care or services that were provided for free in the past.

         2.      Unless there was a written agreement for compensation at the time the care or
                 service was received, the transfer is uncompensated.

         3.      If the agreement or the terms of the agreement are contradictory or inconsistent,
                 refer to MA-2300, Applications, to evaluate for conflicting information.

X.    ADDITIONAL EXCEPTIONS TO APPLYING TRANSFER SANCTION

      Except for the allowable transfers outlined in VII., VIII., and IX. above, presume all other
      transfers are made to make the individual eligible for payment of institutional services or in-
      home health services and supplies after the individual has received institutional services.

      Evaluate each situation on a case-by-case basis. It may be done as part of the application
      process, redetermination, change in situation, or appeal. The individual or his representative
      may rebut the presumption and provide evidence that the transfer was made exclusively for a
      reason other than to establish eligibility for Medicaid. Additionally, he may rebut the value of
      the transferred asset or the value of compensation received. See XIII. below.

      Do not apply a transfer sanction when the a/b has been granted a waiver for undue hardship or
      when one of the situations in XI. below is verified. Refer to MA-2245, Undue Hardship Waiver
      for Transfer of Assets, for procedures to determine if an undue hardship exists.

XI.   NON-ALLOWABLE TRANSFERS
      Some transfers have special rules based on the type of asset transferred. Apply the following
      rules.

      A. Date of Transfer for Real Property or Interest in Real Property

         The date of transfer for real property is the day the deed is signed by the grantor,
         delivered, and accepted by the grantee. Unless fraud is suspected, it is presumed this is the
         date recorded on the front of the deed. The deed does not have to be notarized or
         registered in order to be a valid title transfer. However, a deed of gift must be registered

                                                    26
   within 2 years to remain valid.

B. Transfer of Contiguous Property When The A/B or A/B’s Spouse Does not Have
   Ownership Interest in the Principal Place of Residence

   1.     Up to $12,000 value of contiguous property is excluded in determining resource
          eligibility (See MA-2230, Financial Resources) when the a/b or the a/b’s spouse
          does not have ownership interest in the principal place of residence. This
          exclusion is not a homesite exclusion. For contiguous property to be excluded as
          the homesite, the a/b must have an ownership interest in the principal place of
          residence.
   2.     If a non-allowable transfer of contiguous property is made and the a/b or the a/b’s
          spouse does not have an ownership interest in the principal place of residence,
          determine the sanction period using the total uncompensated value of the property.
          Do not subtract the $12,000 in determining the value of the property.

C. Joint Ownership of Liquid Assets

   1.     Evaluate for transfer of assets when the a/b takes any action that eliminates his
          ownership or reduces his control of a liquid asset. Examples include when the a/b
          adds another individual(s) to a bank account or certificate of deposit.

          Determine if a resulting trust exists. The transfer is a resulting trust if the asset is in
          another person’s name but it is held for the benefit of the a/b and the person
          holding the asset retains no legal interest in the asset and will not benefit from the
          disposal of the asset. If a resulting trust is verified, there is no sanctionable
          transfer.

   2.     The date of transfer depends on the action:

          a. The date of transfer for an "or" account is the date the asset is actually reduced.

          b. The date of transfer for an "and" account is the date the a/b reduces his control
             of the asset.

D. Transfers Involving Countable Trusts

   Note: Any time you learn the a/b or financially responsible spouse or parent created a trust or
   is the beneficiary of a trust, report it to DMA, Third Party Recovery Section. The telephone
   number is 919-647-8100.

   1.     Except for the specific trusts described in VIII. above, evaluate trusts created by
          the a/b with his funds as either:

          a. An available asset to the a/b, or

          b. A transfer of asset.

   2.     Refer to MA-2230, Financial Resources, to determine what portion of the trust is an
          available asset to the a/b. The amount that is unavailable to the a/b is subject to a
                                              27
          transfer sanction.
   3.     Revocable Trust
          a. The date of transfer for a revocable trust is the date a disbursement from the
             trust is made to someone other than the a/b.

          b. The uncompensated value of the transfer is the actual amount paid to an
             individual other than a/b.

   4.     Irrevocable Trusts
          a. The date of transfer is the date the trust is established.

          b. The uncompensated value is the portion of the trust that was made unavailable
             to the a/b on the date the trust is established. Do not subtract any payments
             made from the trust after the trust was established.

          c. Treat additions to existing trusts as a new transfer based on the date of the
             addition. Additions include undistributed interest earned on the trust principal.

E. Stream of Income
   1.     A stream of income is income received on regular basis such as a pension or rental
          income from property.
   2.     When a stream of income is transferred or diverted, treat each payment as a
          separate transfer.

F. Transfer of Income Producing Property
   1.     If a homesite becomes income producing, it remains a homesite for transfer of asset
          purposes if it meets the criteria in VII.B.1. Evaluate transfer of home sites,
          including those that have become income producing.
   2.     If income producing property that meets the 6% net annual income test (See MA-
          2230, Financial Resources, for policy on the 6% net annual income test.), is
          transferred, evaluate for transfer of assets.
          The uncompensated value is the value of the property less any compensation
          received less any amount used to pay off an encumbrance. Do not deduct $6,000.
   3.     When evaluating a transfer of income producing property, do not consider a stream
          of income.

G. Inheritance

   A transfer also occurs when an individual takes action to waive or renounce an inheritance to
   which he is entitled.




                                             28
XII.   TRANSFER SANCTION

       A. Determine the Uncompensated Value of Transfer(s)

          1.     List each non-allowable transfer occurring on or after the lookback date through
                 the current date.
          2.     Determine the date of transfer. Calculation for sanction periods vary depending on
                 the date of the transfer(s). Refer to XII.B. below and XII.C. below to determine the
                 sanction period based on the transfer(s) date. Refer to XI. above for dates of transfer
                 in special situations.

          3.     Determine the value of each transferred asset based on policy in MA-2230,
                 Financial Resources. For transfers of tenancy-in-common interest in real property,
                 see IX.E. above.

                 a. For the transferred asset, establish the market value (tax value) at the time of
                    the transfer.

                     NOTE: The value of certain transferred assets can be rebutted. If an asset's
                     value has already been successfully rebutted as part of the application process,
                     use the established rebutted value.

                 b. Subtract any encumbrances at the time of transfer to establish the equity of the
                    asset. The remainder is the equity.

                 c. Subtract the amount or value received, if any, from the equity. This is the
                    uncompensated value.
                 d. See IX.A, IX.B, and IX.C above for exceptions to the rule when evaluating
                     annuities, promissory notes, loans, mortgages, or other property agreements,
                     and life estates.

       B. Determine the Sanction Period for Transfers Occurring prior to November 1, 2007

          The length of the sanction period is based on the uncompensated value of the transfer, and
          for transfers prior to November 1, 2007 it begins with the month of transfer. Only
          determine countable assets for transfers during this period with the exceptions noted in
          VII.B. above.

          1.     Total the uncompensated value of transfers in the lookback period that took place
                 prior to November 1, 2007. If the total uncompensated value of transfers is less
                 than the current average private NF rate of $10,317, there is no sanction. This
                 private NF rate is subject to change. DHB will issue changes in the rate.

          2.     Divide the total uncompensated value for all transfers by $10,317.

          3.     Round this number down to the lowest whole number.

          4.     The result is the number of months of sanction.
                                                   29
5.    Begin the sanction period with the month the total transfer(s) equals $10,317.

6.    For other transfers that occur during the sanction period, add the uncompensated
      value of those transfers to the total and divide the total by the average private NF
      rate.

      a. Round down each total. This is the number of months in the sanction period so
         far.
      b. Stop adding and end the sanction period with the first month in which:

          (1)    No transfer occurred, and
          (2)    No sanction applies to that month from an earlier transfer.

7.    Begin a new sanction period with the month the total transfer(s) equals $$10,317.

8.    Never begin a new sanction period until the previous period has expired, and no
      transfer was made in the month following the last month of the expired sanction
      period.

9.    When both spouses are institutionalized, requesting CAP, or receiving in-home
      health services and supplies, divide the sanction period between the spouses. The
      total sanction imposed on both spouses cannot exceed the number of months of the
      sanction period.

10.   For a transfer made prior to November 1, 2007, if a community spouse is
      institutionalized after the ISP, requests CAP or receives in-home health services
      and supplies, and a sanction period is still in effect for the institutionalized spouse:

      a. Divide the remaining sanction period equally between the spouses.

      b. Do not establish a new lookback period for the former CUSP. The lookback
         date is the same for financially responsible spouses. Refer to V.B. above.

      c. Evaluate for additional transfer of assets by the former CUSP on or after the
         lookback date. A non-allowable transfer by the CUSP after Medicaid
         eligibility is established for the ISP is not a sanctionable transfer for the ISP.
         Add any additional sanction months to the CUSP’s portion of the shared
         sanction. Refer to V.B. above.

11.   If a community spouse is institutionalized on or after November 1, 2007, the ISP
      was institutionalized prior to November 1, 2007, and the CUSP now requests CAP
      or PACE services, or receives in-home health services and supplies, and a sanction
      period is still in effect for the institutionalized spouse:

      a. Determine the CUSP’s lookback period. Refer to V. above.

      b. Evaluate all transfers that are in the CUSP’s lookback period.

                                         30
          c. Determine if the transfer that resulted in the ISP’s sanction period occurred
             within the CUSP’s lookback period.

              (1)     Divide the remaining sanction period between the spouses. If the
                      amount is not equal, the larger amount can be given to either spouse.
                      Determine what is best for both spouses. The total sanction imposed
                      on both spouses cannot exceed the number of months of the sanction
                      period.

              (2)     Determine any additional sanction periods to be imposed on the CUSP.

              (3)     Add additional sanction periods to the end of existing sanction period.

          d. Evaluate for additional transfer of assets by the former CUSP on or after the
             lookback date. A non-allowable transfer by the CUSP after Medicaid
             eligibility is established for the ISP is not a sanctionable transfer for the ISP.

              It is further determined that the CUSP has a 4-month sanction period for
              additional transfers. The CUSP now has a 7 month sanction period and the
              ISP a 2 month sanction period.

   12.    NC FAST will determine sanction period, if applicable. Refer to NC FAST Job
          Aid: Sanction for Transfer of Assets.

C. Determine the Sanction Period for Transfers Occurring on or after November 1,
   2007

   The length of the sanction period is based on the uncompensated value of the transfer. For
   transfers on or after November 1, 2007, it begins on the date specified in XII.C.1. Use
   DHB-5181, Calculating Penalty Period, as a tool to assist in calculating the penalty period.


   1.     The date the sanction period begins depends upon when the transfer occurred. The
          sanction period for transfers that occur prior to November 1, 2007, should be
          determined based on policy in effect at that time. Note: This date may occur on any
          day of the month.

          a. When the transfer occurs prior to the individual becoming eligible for Medicaid
             for institutional services, the sanction period begins on the date when he meets
             all other eligibility criteria and
              (1)     For nursing facility cases the first day he is in a nursing facility with an
                      approved FL-2, or
              (2)     For CAP cases the day he has an approved plan of care and an FL2 and is
                      authorized for Medicaid. If he had to meet a deductible it is the date the
                      deductible is met.




                                             31
        (3)     For PACE cases the day he would have been authorized by Medicaid to
                receive PACE services and he is still enrolled in PACE.

     b. An a/b who has a deductible does not meet all other eligibility criteria and is
        not otherwise eligible until the day the deductible is met. The sanction period
        begins on the day the deductible is met.

        (1)     If a deductible is met during the month of entry into a nursing facility,
                the sanction period begins the day the deductible is met.

        (2)     If the deductible is not met during the month of entry into the nursing
                facility, the sanction period begins the first day of the next month, the
                first day of long term care budgeting.

     c. When the transfer occurs after an individual becomes eligible for Medicaid for
        payment of institutional services, the sanction period begins the first day of the
        month following the notice of the sanction period. Implement the sanction
        period as quickly as possible after the notice period expires.

     d. For a sanction that cannot begin prior to the first day of the month that follows
        three full calendar months from the date of the report or discovery of a transfer:

        (1)     The beginning date of the sanction period is the first day of the month
                following three full calendar months from the date of the report or
                discovery of a transfer (month 4).

        (2)     If the sanction cannot be keyed until after month 4 due to notification
                requirements, the period beginning with month 4 until the month the
                action is effective must be referred to the local DSS Program Integrity
                Section for recoupment.

        (3)     Key the remaining sanction period in the AT screen.

                If the entire sanction period ends prior to the month the sanction can be
                imposed due to notice requirements, refer the entire sanction to the local
                DSS Program Integrity Section and do not key a sanction period.
     e. The sanction period cannot begin until after any existing sanction period has
        expired.

        NOTE: A sanction period cannot be triggered by receipt of in-home health
        services and supplies. In-home health services can only be sanctioned if they
        are received in a sanction period that began due to receipt of institutional
        services.

2.   Calculate the sanction period.

     a. Total the uncompensated value of all transfers in the look back period.
        Transfers prior to November 1, 2007, should not be totaled with transfers that
        occur on or after November 1, 2007. Determine a sanction period on any and
                                       32
   all transfers regardless of whether the amount transferred is over or under the
   private NF rate.

b. Divide the total uncompensated value for all transfers by the private NF rate,
   $10,317.

   The result is the length of the sanction period. Do not round down to the nearest
   whole month. Round the amount to 2 decimals.

c. Multiply the remaining fractional amount by 31.

   (1)     The result is the additional number of days to be added to the sanction
           period.

   (2)     Drop any fractional portion of a day.

d. Calculate the sanction period, beginning on the date specified in XII.C.1.
   above.

   (1)     Determine the sanction period for the whole months calculated in
           XII.C.2.b. above.

   (2)     Add the fractional days to the sanction determined in 2.d.(1) above.

   (3)     Authorize CAP cases the day after the last day of the sanction.

           (a)    Enter the CAP effective date in NC FAST.

           (b)    When the individual becomes eligible for CAP, re-calculate the
                  deductible for the certification period according to instructions
                  in MA-2280, Community Alternatives Program (CAP),
                  Medicaid Eligibility, II.A.9.d. and III.F.

   (4)     For cases with PML, convert the number of days in the sanction-ending
           month to a dollar amount.

           (a)    Multiply the number of days in the month (if less than the full
                  calendar month) by $343.90 (average private daily rate).

           (b)    Add this to the first month’s PML amount regardless of whether the
                  person has a zero PML. Do not deduct any amount for UMN or
                  income protected for spouse or dependents at home.

           (c)    If the full sanction period (including the fractional days) ends on the
                  last day of the sanction-ending month, do not convert to a dollar
                  amount. The a/b is ineligible for that entire month.




                                 33
          3.      When both spouses are institutionalized, requesting CAP, or receiving in-
                  home health services and supplies, divide the sanction period between the
                  spouses. The total sanction imposed on both spouses cannot exceed the
                  number of months of the sanction period.

          4.      When the CUSP is institutionalized after the ISP and the ISP had a transfer
                  and sanction which occurred within the CUSPs lookback period, divide the
                  remaining sanction between the two spouses. If the amount is not equal,
                  the larger amount can be given to either spouse. Determine what is best for
                  both spouses. The total sanction imposed on both spouses cannot exceed
                  the number of months of the sanction period.

          5.      NC FAST will determine sanction period. Refer to NC FAST Job Aid:
                  Sanction for Transfer of Assets.

D. Sanction Period When an Individual Leaves the Institution, CAP, or PACE

   A sanction period runs continuously from the first date of the sanction period through the
   end of the sanction, regardless of whether the individual remains in or leaves the
   institution or continues to need CAP, PACE, or in-home health services and supplies.

E. Lifting or Reducing the Sanction Period

   1.     When all transferred assets are returned to the a/b, evidence must be edited.

   2.     Assets are considered returned when:

          a. The actual asset is transferred back to the a/b, or

          b. The a/b receives fair market value as compensation for the asset after the
             transfer. Value may be received in cash or money spent on the client's behalf.
             Examples of money spent on the client's behalf are: children pay for private
             LTC, buy a burial plot for their parents, or pay old bills for their parents. The
             cash or money spent on the client’s behalf does not have to come from the
             person to whom the asset was originally transferred.

          c. Verify any money spent on the client's behalf is, in fact, paid. For example,
             the nursing facility verifies the outstanding bill has been paid.

   3.     If a sanction period has already been assigned and nursing home cost of care denied,
          when all the transferred assets are returned, the entire sanction period is "erased".
          However, the returned assets are countable to the a/b in determining eligibility for the entire
          period they were previously not in the a/b’s name.

          a. Determine eligibility for nursing home cost of care based on the date of
             application.

          b. Reverify assets considering the returned assets as if a/b owned them
             throughout the sanction period.
                                               34
     c. Erase the sanction period beginning with the first month of the sanction
        period.

4.   When only a portion of the transferred asset is returned to the a/b, NC FAST will
     determine if this makes the a/b ineligible. The sanction period begin date must
     change to the point at which the a/b is institutionalized and otherwise eligible for
     Medicaid.

     a. Determine eligibility for nursing home cost of care based on the date of
        application.
     b. Reverify assets considering the returned assets as if a/b owned them
        throughout the sanction period.




                                       35
          c. Modify the sanction period. Refer to NC FAST Job AID: Editing or End
             Dating Sanctions.

D. Budgeting During Sanction Period

   1.     If an individual is sanctioned for payment of nursing home cost of care, CAP or in-
          home health services and supplies due to transfer of assets, continue to determine
          eligibility for other Medicaid services.

   2.     If an individual is sanctioned for payment of PACE services due to transfer of
          assets and does not disenroll from the PACE Program, he is ineligible for
          Medicaid in any aid program/category during the sanction period. (Refer to MA-
          2275, Program of All-Inclusive Care for the Elderly.)
   3.     Budget as PLA. Refer to MA-2260, Financial Eligibility Regulations-PLA and
          MA-2270, Long Term Care Need and Budgeting. If it is determined that an
          individual must meet a deductible, see XII.C.1.b. above.
   4.     Continue to allow the community spouse resource protection when the spouse in
          LTC is budgeted PLA because of a transfer of assets sanction. (However, the
          community spouse income allowance does not apply in pla budgeting.)

 E. Applicant/Beneficiary Fails to Provide Information to Establish Transfer or
    Sanction Period

    If the a/b fails to provide the necessary information to determine if a non-allowable
    transfer has occurred or the length of the sanction period, deny the application for failure
    to provide necessary information. Approve as PLA if eligible. Follow policy for
    requesting information in MA-2300, Application for beneficiaries.

    If unable to determine if a non-allowable transfer has occurred or the length of the
    sanction period, use the DHB-5097/5097S, Request For Information, to request the
    necessary information from the a/b.




                                             36
XIII. REBUTTAL
    A. General
       Advise the a/b using the DHB-5161, Transfer of Asset Below Current Market Value, of
       the transfer(s) considered, the sanction period, the right to rebut the value of the asset
       transferred, the right to rebut the presumption or provide evidence to prove the transfer
       was made exclusively for a purpose other than establishing Medicaid eligibility, the right
       to prove the compensation received is greater than established, the right to prove the a/b
       has been defrauded, the right to prove the asset has been returned, or right to prove intent
       to dispose asset at current market value.

       1.     Also advise that they may:

              a. Rebut the presumption that the asset was transferred to establish or retain
                 Medicaid eligibility, or
              b. All or a portion of the asset has been returned, or

              c. After the date of transfer the money was spent for the benefit of the a/b or the
                 a/b’s spouse.

                  Follow notification procedures in XIV.B. below.

       2.     The a/b or the a/b’s spouse must show by the greater weight of the evidence that:

              a. The transferred asset is less than the value established by the county dss, or

              b. The value of compensation received is greater than the value established, or

              c. At least two attempts to dispose of the asset for current market value, or

              d. All or a portion of the asset has been returned, or

              e. The money has been spent for the benefit of the a/b or the a/b’s spouse, or

              f. The asset was transferred solely for a purpose other than qualifying for
                 Medicaid.

                  The evidence presented (written or oral) must be more persuasive than all
                  evidence presented to the contrary.

                  The rebuttal evidence may include the a/b’s (spouse/legal representative)
                  statement regarding the circumstances of the transfer, including the specific
                  reason the asset(s) was transferred, the date of transfer, the name and
                  relationship of the person(s) to whom the asset was transferred, and any
                  compensation received. Examples of evidence are oral or written statements
                  from persons knowledgeable about the situation, medical records, and bank
                  records.

                                                 37
B. Rebutting the Value of the Transferred Asset and Amount of Compensation
   Received

   1.    To prove that the value of transferred asset is less than the value established by the
         county, the a/b or the a/b’s spouse must provide a signed written statement from a
         knowledgeable person located in the same geographic area in which the property is
         located. The knowledgeable person cannot be a family member, friend or someone
         who stands to gain from the transaction. The statement must include:

         a. A description of the asset that clearly identifies the asset,

         b. A specific statement as to the value of the asset and when the value was
            determined,

         c. The reason for establishing the lesser value, and

         d. The basis for the source’s knowledge of the value of the property.

             A “knowledgeable person” is an individual involved in the sale or appraisal of
             the type of asset in question, involved in the financing of sales of the type of
             asset in question, an official of the local property tax jurisdiction, or other
             person who can establish in the written statement that he is knowledgeable of
             the value of the type of asset in question. The “same geographic area in which
             the asset was located” is the same area as covered by local radio, television,
             newspaper or other media.

   2.    If the evidence provided proves that the value of the transferred asset is less than
         the value established under policy, recalculate the uncompensated value using the
         lesser value.

         a. If the a/b or the a/b’s spouse received no compensation for the transferred
            asset, shorten the sanction period according to the reduced value of the
            transferred asset.

         b. If the a/b or the a/b’s spouse received compensation for the transferred asset
            with a fair market value that is at least equal to the reduced value of the
            transferred asset, do not impose a sanction period.

         c. If the a/b or the a/b’s spouse received compensation for the transferred asset
            with a fair market value that is less than the reduced value of the transferred
            asset, shorten the sanction period according to the reduced uncompensated
            value of the transfer.




                                            38
3.   To prove that the value of compensation received in return for a transferred asset is
     greater than the value established under policy, the a/b or the a/b’s spouse must
     provide evidence of the greater value. Examples of evidence include cancelled
     checks, receipts, bills of sale, records of a bank or other financial institution that
     establishes the value of compensation received. For compensation received in the
     form of real or personal property, use the evidence listed in XIII.B. above.

     If the evidence provided proves that the value of the compensation received for a
     transferred asset is greater than the value established by the county, recalculate the
     uncompensated value of the transfer based on the greater value of the compensation.

     a. If the a/b or the a/b’s spouse received compensation for the transferred asset
        with a fair market value that is at least equal to the value of the transferred
        asset, do not impose a sanction.

     b. If the a/b or the a/b’s spouse received compensation for the transferred asset
        with a fair market value that is less than the value of the transferred asset,
        shorten the sanction period to the reduced uncompensated value of the transfer.

4.   To prove that all or a portion of a transferred asset has been returned, the a/b or the
     a/b’s spouse must provide evidence establishing the return of the asset. Examples of
     evidence includes property deeds, closing statements, property tax records, financial
     statements, records of banks or other financial institutions, deeds of trust, title
     transfer records, contracts and other legally binding agreements. The asset may be
     returned beyond the time required to provide evidence. Therefore, allow the a/b an
     additional 12 days in which to provide the evidence.

     a. Do not apply a sanction when the entire transferred asset is returned.

     b. When a portion of the transferred asset is returned, reduce the value of the
        transferred asset by the value of the asset returned. Recalculate the sanction
        period based on the reduced value of the transferred asset. See XII.E. above.

5.   To prove that money has been spent for the benefit of the a/b or the a/b’s spouse
     after the date of the transfer, the a/b or the a/b’s spouse must present the following
     documents: cancelled checks, receipts, bills of sale, bank or other financial
     institution records, or other records that prove the amount of money spent, the date
     on which it was spent, any goods or services purchased for the a/b or the a/b’s
     spouse and that the a/b or the a/b’s spouse was the beneficiary of the benefit from
     these expenditures. The asset may be returned beyond the time required to provide
     evidence. Therefore, allow the a/b an additional 12 days in which to provide the
     evidence.

     a. Do not impose a sanction when the amount of money spent for the benefit of
        the a/b or the a/b’s spouse after the date of the transfer is at least equal to the
        uncompensated value of the transfer.




                                        39
          b. When the amount of money spent for the benefit of the a/b or the a/b’s spouse
             after the date of the transfer is less than the value of the transferred asset,
             reduce the uncompensated value of the transfer by the amount of money spent
             after the date of the transfer. Shorten the sanction period according to the
             reduced uncompensated value of the transfer.

C. Establishing That a Transfer of Assets Was for a Reason Solely Other Than to
   Become Eligible for Medicaid

   Do not impose a sanction when an asset was transferred solely for a reason other than to
   become eligible for Medicaid. The following situations establish that an asset was
   transferred solely for a reason other than to become eligible for Medicaid:

   1.     The asset was stolen. The a/b or the a/b’s spouse must provide greater weight of
          evidence which may include but is not limited to a report to law enforcement
          officials.

   2.     The a/b has been defrauded.

          a. Refer the case to protective services and/or if there is a legal representative, the
             clerk of court, to pursue possible reversal of the action and return of the asset to
             the a/b.

          b. Do not apply a transfer sanction when Adult Protective Services investigates
             and determines that the a/b is a victim of fraud and did not take the action with
             the intent of becoming eligible for Medicaid.

          c. The a/b or the a/b’s spouse must provide greater weight of evidence which may
             include but is not limited to a report to law enforcement officials.

   3.     The a/b or the a/b’s spouse is a victim of exploitation. The a/b or the a/b’s spouse
          must provide through the greater weight of evidence which may include:

          a. Proof that includes substantial evidence that the a/b or the a/b’s spouse is a
             victim of exploitation due to the illegal or improper use of a disabled adult or
             his assets for another’s profit or advantage.

          b. Proof of a request to the county department of social services for adult
             protective services for the a/b or the a/b’s spouse.

          c. The a/b or the a/b’s spouse must provide greater weight of evidence which may
             include but is not limited to a report to law enforcement officials.




                                            40
4.   The a/b or the a/b’s spouse is a victim of actual or threatened abuse. The a/b or the
     a/b’s spouse must provide through the greater weight of evidence:

     a. Proof that includes greater evidence that the a/b or the a/b’s spouse is a victim
        of actual or threatened abuse due to the willful infliction of physical pain, injury
        or mental anguish, unreasonable confinement, or the willful deprivation by a
        caretaker of services which are necessary to maintain mental and physical
        health, and

     b. Proof of a request to the county department of social services for adult
        protective services for the a/b or the a/b’s spouse.

     c. The a/b or the a/b’s spouse must provide greater weight of evidence which may
        include but is not limited to a report to law enforcement officials.

5.   The transfer of assets occurred as part of a regular, in frequency and amount, pattern
     of giving. The greater weight of evidence must include written records that clearly
     document the pattern of giving. Such records include, but are not limited to bank
     account records and property transfer records.

6.   In situations other than those noted in XIII.C. 1. through 5. above, when an a/b or
     an a/b’s spouse alleges that the transfer of assets was made solely for a reason other
     than to become eligible for Medicaid, evaluate the evidence presented. The
     evidence might establish another reason for the transfer. However, if establishing
     Medicaid eligibility for institutional services or in-home health services and
     supplies after receiving institutional services was also considered, the transfer was
     not exclusively for a purpose other than to establish or retain Medicaid eligibility.

     a. In making the determination, consider the following:

        (1)    The a/b’s or the a/b’s spouses’ age, general health, living arrangement,
               and amount of assets retained to meet future needs at the time of the
               transfer;

        (2)    How the a/b expected to meet his medical and other living expenses
               without the transferred asset;

        (3)    Whether the case record documents any inquiry by the a/b, the a/b’s
               spouse, representative, or other interested party about asset limits for
               Medicaid, or other eligibility requirements for Medicaid;

        (4)    Whether the a/b or the a/b’s spouse, representative, or other interested
               party consulted or hired an attorney for estate planning purposes;

        (5)    Whether the individuals who provided the knowledgeable statements
               concerning the circumstances of the transfer stand to gain in any way
               from the transfer;



                                       41
                   (6)    Whether the transfer is a one-time gift by the a/b or the a/b’s spouse to a
                          charity, religious organization, or family member made when the a/b or
                          the a/b’s spouse did not anticipate needing long term medical care.

               b. Document the response provided to the considerations listed in XIII.C.6.a.
                  above. The a/b or the a/b’s spouse or the a/b’s or the a/b’s spouse’s legal
                  representative must also provide a complete written accounting of the transfer,
                  including all relevant documentation that shows the following:

                   (1)    The a/b or the a/b’s spouse’s purpose for transferring the asset;

                   (2)    The a/b or the a/b’s spouse’s attempts to dispose of the asset at fair
                          market value;

                   (3)    The a/b or the a/b’s spouse’s reasons for accepting less than fair market
                          value such as:

                            (a)     A forced sale was done under reasonable circumstances;

                            (b)     Little or no market demand exists for the type of asset
                                    transferred; or

                            (c)     The asset was transferred to settle a legal debt approximately
                                    equal to the fair market value of the transferred assets; and

                   (4)    The a/b or the a/b’s spouse’s relationship, if any, to the persons to
                          whom the asset was transferred.

                c. In addition to the written evidence provided in XIII.C.6.b. above, evidence
                   from other sources may be considered. Examples of other sources include but
                   are not limited to bank records, medical records or oral or written statements
                   from persons knowledgeable about the a/b’s or the a/b’s situation and the
                   transfer of assets.

XIII. DECISION AND NOTIFICATION PROCEDURES (DENIAL/REBUTTAL/UNDUE
      HARDSHIP)

    When it is determined that a non-allowable transfer has occurred and a sanction period is to
    be applied, notify the a/b in writing of the sanction period and rebuttal procedures.

    A. Determination of Medicaid Eligibility

       Do not delay the determination of Medicaid eligibility while evaluating a transfer of assets.
       An a/b may be eligible or ineligible for Medicaid regardless of a transfer of assets.

       1.      If the a/b is found ineligible for Medicaid, a sanction for transfer of assets cannot
               be applied. Stop the evaluation of the transfer of assets.



                                                  42
   2.     If the a/b is found eligible for Medicaid, is requesting assistance with institutional
          services, and evaluation of a transfer of assets is pending,

          a. Notify the a/b

             (1)     Of eligibility for non-institutional services, and

             (2)     That eligibility for institutional services is still pending.

                     This is a manual notice.

          b. Once the evaluation of the transfer is complete:

             (1)     If the evaluation later reveals no sanctions, send a revised approval
                     notice authorizing eligibility for nursing home cost of care, CAP or
                     PACE.

             (2)     If the evaluation reveals a non-allowable transfer and a sanction period,
                     follow procedures in XIV.B. below.

B. Notifying Individual of Sanction and Right to Rebut

   1.     If the transfer of assets evaluation reveals that a non-allowable transfer has
          occurred and the sanction period can be determined, use the DHB-5097/5097S,
          Request for Information, and the DHB-5161, Transfer of Asset Below Current
          Market Value, to notify the a/b:

          a. Applicant is ineligible for payment for institutional services and/or in-home
             health services and supplies, but only after receiving institutional services, due
             to transfer of assets. Applicants enrolled in a PACE program with a PACE
             organization are ineligible for Medicaid in any aid program/category except
             MQB. (See MA- 2275, Program of All-Inclusive Care for the Elderly)

          b. The transfer(s) considered, the sanction period, the right to rebut the value of
             the asset transferred, the right to rebut the presumption or provide evidence to
             prove the transfer was made exclusively for a purpose other than establishing
             Medicaid eligibility, the right to prove compensation has been received, the
             right to prove the a/b has been defrauded, the right to prove the asset has been
             returned, prove the money has been spent on behalf of the individual, or right
             to prove intent to dispose asset at current market value. See XI. above.

             Refer to MA-2230, Financial Resources, for requirements to rebut the value of
             the asset.




                                             43
     c. Whether or not he is eligible for non-institutional services.

2.   Follow application processing procedures when requesting information from an
     applicant. Send at least two requests for information to the applicant. Refer to
     MA-2300, Applications.

3.   Allow the beneficiary 12 calendar days to provide evidence to rebut the reason for
     the transfer, rebut the established value of the transferred asset, etc. Allow an
     additional 12 calendar days if evidence is not received within the first 12 days.

4.   The county has 12 calendar days to make a decision after the information is
     received. If the county determines additional information is needed, allow an
     additional 12 calendar days for the a/b to provide the information.

5.   If the a/b proves that the transfer was not made to become eligible for Medicaid,
     document the case record and notify the a/b using a DSS-8109, Your Application for
     Benefits is Being Denied or Withdrawn, that the sanction will not be imposed.

6.   If the a/b provides evidence that rebuts the established value of the transferred asset
     or that compensation has been received or that all or a portion of the asset has been
     returned or money has been spent on his behalf, recalculate the sanction period,
     document the case record and notify the a/b of the change.

     a. If the change results in no sanction, notify the a/b in writing that the sanction
        will not be imposed.

     b. If the change results in a shorter sanction period, notify the a/b in writing of the
        new sanction period using the DHB-5113, Notification of Right to Request an
        Undue Hardship Waiver (Transfer of Assets).

7.   If an applicant for institutional services fails to rebut the sanction, either by failing
     to provide information within the time frame described in XIV.B.3. above or the
     information he provides does not rebut the sanction, send a DHB-5113,
     Notification of Right to Request an Undue Hardship Waiver (Transfer of Assets),
     to notify the applicant of ineligibility and right to request an undue hardship
     waiver.

8.   If a beneficiary of institutional services fails to rebut the sanction, either by failing
     to provide information within the time frame described in XIV.B.2. above or the
     information he provides does not rebut the sanction, send a DHB-5113,
     Notification of Right to Request an Undue Hardship Waiver (Transfer of Assets),
     to notify the applicant of ineligibility and right to request an undue hardship
     waiver.




                                         44
C. Undue Hardship

  If, after evaluation and rebuttal, it is determined that a non-allowable transfer has occurred,
  notify the a/b in writing of the sanction period and the undue hardship waiver process using
  DHB-5113, Notification of Right to Request an Undue Hardship Waiver (Transfer of
  Assets). The request for an undue hardship waiver must be made to the county dss within
  12 calendar days from the date of notification of a transfer of assets sanction and the a/b’s
  right to request a waiver of the sanction because it will cause an undue hardship. Refer to
  MA-2245, Undue Hardship Waiver for Transfer of Assets, for policy and procedures for
  determining if a transfer of assets sanction should be waived.

  1.     If an applicant is not granted an undue hardship waiver because he fails to request
         the waiver, fails to provide necessary information, or the information provided
         does not establish that undue hardship exists, NC FAST will send a DSS-8109,
         Your Application for Benefits is Being Denied or Withdrawn.

  2.     If an ongoing beneficiary who is requesting institutional services is not granted an
         undue hardship waiver because he fails to request the waiver, fails to provide
         necessary information, or the information provided does not establish that undue
         hardship exists, NC FAST will send a DSS-8109, Your Application for Benefits is
         Being Denied or Withdrawn.

  3.     If an ongoing beneficiary of institutional services is not granted an undue hardship
         waiver because he fails to request the waiver, fails to provide necessary
         information, or the information provided does not establish that undue hardship
         exists, NC FAST will send a DSS-8110, Notice of Modification, Termination, or
         Continuation of Public Assistance.

         After the timely notice period has expired, notify the facility the beneficiary is no
         longer eligible for payment of nursing home cost of care. For CAP beneficiaries,
         notify the CAP lead agency/case manager that the individual is no longer eligible
         for CAP. For PACE beneficiaries, notify the PACE organization by sending the
         DHB-5106, Medicaid/PACE Referral.

         a. Change the living type in NC FAST. If the beneficiary was dually eligible,
            close both products.

         b. Update the transfer of assets evaluation indicator in NC FAST. Refer to XV.
            below.




                                            45
          4.      Although an individual under a transfer of assets sanction may not be eligible for
                  assistance with nursing home cost of care or in-home health services and supplies,
                  he may be eligible for other Medicaid covered services. If, after an undue hardship
                  notification and review, the a/b is determined ineligible for the requested CAP or
                  nursing home cost of care or in-home health services and supplies services but
                  remains eligible for pla Medicaid, notify the a/b of the decision using the
                  appropriate notification text. Note: Individuals under a transfer of assets sanction
                  and enrolled in the PACE Program are ineligible for Medicaid in any aid
                  program/category except MQB. Refer to MA- 2275, Program of All-Inclusive Care
                  for the Elderly.

       E. Hearing Process

          Refer to MA-2420, Notice and Hearing Process, regarding the hearing process.

XIV.   TRACKING TRANSFER OF ASSETS SANCTION PERIOD

       An individual who is ineligible for institutional services or CAP due to a transfer of assets
       sanction may be authorized for other Medicaid covered services. Authorize Medicaid under
       PLA provided the applicant/beneficiary meets all other Medicaid eligibility factors. Transfer of
       Assets sanction period is available in NC FAST. The sanction period continues for in-home
       health services and supplies if the a/b returns to private living.

       Asset Transfer evidence must be updated for PACE applicants/beneficiaries with current or
       past eligibility.

       The Assets Transfer evidence should be updated once a transfer of assets evaluation has been
       completed. This may occur when processing an application, a redetermination for a non-SSI
       beneficiary is due, an ex parte review for an SSI beneficiary is due, requested by the a/b or
       provider, or notified by any source that a transfer has occurred.

       The Assets Transfer evidence must be updated for all cases except MQB, even if there have
       been no non-allowable transfers. Update the Assets Transfer Tracking Screen by entering the
       evaluation indicator and if applicable the sanction period begin and end dates. Include any
       partial months.




                                                    46

