Source URL: https://codes.findlaw.com/nc/chapter-36c-north-carolina-uniform-trust-code/nc-gen-st-sect-36c-5-505.html ; https://codes.findlaw.com/nc/chapter-28a-administration-of-decedents-estates/nc-gen-st-sect-28a-15-1.html
Retrieved: 2026-09-23
Note: WebFetch extraction, not verbatim save. ncleg.gov returned 403.

N.C. Gen. Stat. Sec. 36C-5-505(a)
(1) "During the lifetime of the settlor, the property of a revocable trust is subject to claims of the settlor's creditors."
(3) "After the death of a settlor, and subject to the settlor's right to direct the source from which liabilities will be paid, the property of a trust that was revocable at the settlor's death is subject to claims of the settlor's creditors, costs of administration of the settlor's estate, the expenses of the settlor's funeral and disposal of remains, and statutory allowances to a surviving spouse and children to the extent that the settlor's probate estate is inadequate to satisfy those claims, costs, expenses, and allowances, unless barred by applicable law."

N.C. Gen. Stat. Sec. 28A-15-1. Assets of the estate generally
(a) All of the real and personal property, both legal and equitable, of a decedent shall be assets available for the discharge of debts and other claims against the decedent's estate in the absence of a statute expressly excluding any such property. Provided that before real property is selected the personal representative must determine that such selection is in the best interest of the administration of the estate.
(b) In determining what property of the estate shall be sold, leased, pledged, mortgaged or exchanged for the payment of the debts of the decedent and other claims against the decedent's estate, the personal representative shall select the assets which in the personal representative's judgment are calculated to promote the best interests of the estate. In the selection of assets for this purpose, there shall be no necessary distinction between real and personal property, absent any contrary provision in the will.
(c) If it shall be determined by the personal representative that it is in the best interest of the administration of the estate to sell, lease, or mortgage any real estate or interest therein to obtain money for the payment of debts and other claims against the decedent's estate, the personal representative shall institute a special proceeding before the clerk of superior court for such purpose pursuant to Article 17 of this Chapter, except that no such proceeding shall be required for a sale made pursuant to authority given by will. [remainder on sale procedure omitted]
(d) [crops of deceased person belong to personal representative]
