Source URL: https://ndlegis.gov/cencode/t50c24-1.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-09-23

                                       CHAPTER 50-24.1
                        MEDICAL ASSISTANCE FOR NEEDY PERSONS

    50-24.1-00.1. Definitions.
    As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires:
    1. "Department" means the department of health and human services.
    2. "Medical assistance" means benefits paid under chapter 50-24.1 and title XIX of the
         Social Security Act [42 U.S.C. 1396 et seq.].
    3. "Third party" means an individual, entity, or program that is or may be liable to pay all
         or part of the expenditures for medical assistance furnished under this chapter.

    50-24.1-01. Purpose.
    The purpose of this chapter is to provide medical care and services to persons whose
income and resources are insufficient to meet such costs, and further to provide preventive,
rehabilitative, and other services to help families and individuals to retain or attain capability for
independence or self-care.

    50-24.1-01.1. Department to submit plans and seek waivers.
    The department may submit state plans and may take such actions as are reasonably
necessary to administer programs under its supervision, including the issuance of policy
manuals, forms, and program directives. The department may publish dashboards that
demonstrate program utilization and provider care trends. Within the limits of legislative
appropriation, the department may seek appropriate waivers of the requirements of the federal
statutes or regulations as authorized by federal law.

   50-24.1-01.2. Department may establish and administer state unified dental insurance
coverage plan.
   Repealed by S.L. 2019, ch. 408, § 39.

   50-24.1-01.3. Department to comply with federal requirements - Interagency
cooperation - Civil money penalty fund.
   1. The department shall take any action necessary to comply with the requirements of
        section 1919(h) of the federal Social Security Act [42 U.S.C. 1396r(h)], including
        establishing a process to enforce compliance by nursing facilities with requirements for
        participation in the medical assistance program that conforms to any federal
        regulations implementing that section.
   2. The state treasurer shall establish a fund for the receipt of any civil money penalties
        imposed under subsection 1. Any civil money penalty paid to the department under
        subsection 1 must be deposited in that fund and, subject to the limits of legislative
        appropriation, may be expended for the purpose allowed by the federal government.
   3. This section may not be construed to create any right or authorize any activity not
        provided for in section 1919(h) of the federal Social Security Act [42 U.S.C. 1396r(h)]
        or its implementing federal regulations.
   4. Before the establishment and assessment of civil money penalties permitted by
        section 1919(h) of the federal Social Security Act [42 U.S.C. 1396r(h)], the department
        is encouraged to submit a plan of alternative remedies in accordance with section
        1919(h)(2)(B)(ii) of that Act.

     50-24.1-01.4. Medicaid and Medicare eligible individuals.
     The department may not require prior authorization, additional documentation not required
by Medicare, or additional prescription requirements of durable medical equipment and supplies
in order to process a claim for Medicaid-eligible individuals who are also eligible for Medicare if
an item has been paid by Medicare, unless the item is not covered by Medicaid.




                                             Page No. 1
    50-24.1-02. Eligibility.
    Within the limits of legislative appropriations, medical assistance may be paid for any
person who either has income and resources insufficient to meet the costs of necessary medical
care and services or is eligible for or receiving financial assistance under chapter 50-09 or title
XVI of the Social Security Act, as amended, and:
    1. Has not at any time before or after making application for medical assistance made an
          assignment or transfer of property for the purpose of rendering that person eligible for
          assistance under this chapter. For the purposes of making any determination or
          redetermination of eligibility, the phrase "assignment or transfer" includes actions or
          failures to act which effect a renunciation or disclaimer of any interest which the
          applicant or recipient might otherwise assert or have asserted, or which serve to
          reduce the amounts which an applicant or recipient might otherwise claim from a
          decedent's estate, a trust or similar device, or a person obligated by law to furnish
          support to the applicant or recipient.
    2. Has applied or agrees to apply all proceeds received or receivable by that person or
          that person's eligible spouse from third-party medical coverage, including health care
          coverage, accident insurance, and automobile insurance, to the costs of medical care
          for that person and that person's eligible spouse and children. The department may
          require from any applicant or recipient of medical assistance the assignment of any
          rights accruing under third-party medical coverage. Any rights or amounts so assigned
          must be applied against the cost of medical care paid on behalf of the recipient under
          this chapter. The assignment is not effective as to any carrier before the receipt of
          notice of assignment by such carrier.
    3. Is eligible under rules and regulations established by the department.

    50-24.1-02.1. Assignment of claim.
    1. Each applicant or recipient of benefits under this chapter must be deemed to have
         assigned, to the department, any right of recovery the applicant or recipient may have
         for medical costs incurred under this chapter not exceeding the amount of funds
         expended by the department for the care and treatment of the applicant or recipient.
         The applicant or recipient, or other person empowered by law to act in the applicant's
         or recipient's behalf, shall execute and deliver an assignment of claim, assignment of
         rights, or other authorizations as necessary to secure fully the right of recovery of the
         department. The assignment:
         a. Is effective as to both current and accrued medical support recovery obligations.
         b. Takes effect upon a determination that an applicant is eligible for assistance
               under this chapter.
    2. The department may compromise claims arising out of assignments made under this
         section on such terms as it may deem just and appropriate. The department may not
         be compelled to compromise any claim.

    50-24.1-02.2. Community spouse resource allowance.
    In determining eligibility for medical assistance applicants and recipients, the department
shall establish a community spouse resource allowance equal to the maximum community
spouse resource allowance as provided by 42 U.S.C. 1396r-5(f)(2). This section applies to a
community spouse of an institutionalized spouse. For purposes of this section, "institutionalized
spouse" includes an individual who is described in 42 U.S.C. 1396a(a)(10)(A)(ii)(VI).

   50-24.1-02.3. When designated pre-need funeral service contracts, prepayments, or
deposits not to be considered in eligibility determination.
   1. In determining eligibility for medical assistance, the department may not consider as
        an available resource any pre-need funeral service contracts, prepayments, or
        deposits to a fund which are placed in an irrevocable itemized funeral contract
        designated by the applicant or recipient to pay for the applicant's or recipient's funeral.



                                            Page No. 2
    2.   An applicant or recipient designates a prepayment or deposit for that applicant's or
         recipient's burial by providing funds that must be used for the funeral or burial
         expenses of the applicant or recipient. If an applicant's or recipient's burial is funded by
         an insurance policy, the amount considered set-aside for burial is the lesser of the cost
         basis or the face value of the insurance policy. Interest or earnings retained in a
         funeral fund also may not be considered as an available resource.
    3.   A pre-need funeral service contract, prepayment, or deposit designated under this
         section is not a multiple-party account for purposes of chapter 30.1-31. Any amount in
         a pre-need funeral service contract, prepayment, or deposit designated under this
         section which is not used for funeral or burial expenses must be returned to the estate
         of the medical assistance recipient and is subject to recovery by the department from
         the medical assistance recipient's estate. A claim for payment of funeral expenses may
         not be made against the estate of a deceased medical assistance recipient except to
         the extent the funds are maintained in accordance with this chapter.

     50-24.1-02.4. Exempt income and resources.
     The department may not consider, as an available asset for purposes of determining
eligibility for benefits under this chapter, income and resources set aside by a blind or disabled
person as part of a plan to achieve self-support, if the plan has been approved by the social
security administration.

    50-24.1-02.5. Effect of purchase of insurance on disqualifying transfer.
    1. An individual who secures and maintains insurance that covers the cost of
         substantially all necessary medical care, including necessary care in a nursing home
         and necessary care for an individual who qualifies for admission to a nursing home but
         receives care elsewhere, for at least thirty-six months after the date an asset is
         disposed of, may demonstrate that the asset was disposed of exclusively for a
         purpose other than to qualify for medical assistance by providing proof of that
         insurance.
    2. If purchased after July 31, 2003, the insurance coverage under this section must
         include home health care coverage, assisted living coverage, basic care coverage,
         and skilled nursing facility coverage. The coverage required under this subsection
         must include a daily benefit equal to at least one and fifty-seven hundredths times the
         average daily cost of nursing care for the year in which the policy was issued and an
         aggregate benefit equal to at least one thousand ninety-five times that daily benefit.
    3. This section applies only to policies purchased before the effective date of an
         approved amendment to the state plan for medical assistance that provides for a
         qualified state long-term care insurance partnership under section 1917(b) of the
         Social Security Act [42 U.S.C. 1396p].

    50-24.1-02.6. Medical assistance benefits - Eligibility criteria.
    1. The department shall provide medical assistance benefits to otherwise eligible persons
         who are medically needy persons who have countable income that does not exceed
         an amount determined under subsection 2.
    2. The department shall establish an income level for medically needy persons at an
         amount no less than required by federal law.
    3. The department shall provide medical assistance benefits to children and families
         coverage groups and pregnant women without consideration of assets.
    4. The department shall provide medical assistance benefits to otherwise eligible
         pregnant women who are lawfully present in the United States.
    5. The department may require, as a condition of eligibility, individuals eligible for
         Medicare part A, B, or D to apply for such coverage.
    6. The department shall provide a personal monthly needs allowance, to be reviewed
         and adjusted annually based on inflation.



                                            Page No. 3
    7.   The department shall disregard social security survivor income and court-ordered child
         support for a child who is under the age of eighteen years and is enrolled in a
         medicaid waiver under section 1915(c) of the Social Security Act [42 U.S.C. 1915(c)].

    50-24.1-02.7. Workers with disabilities coverage.
    The department shall establish and implement a buyin program to provide medical
assistance to an individual who, except for substantial gainful activity, meets the definition of
disabled under the supplemental security income program under title XVI of the federal Social
Security Act, who is at least sixteen but less than sixty-five years of age, and who is gainfully
employed. The program:
    1. Must be made available to an individual with a disability who is a member of a
         household with a net income less than two hundred twenty-five percent of the most
         recently revised official poverty line published by the federal office of management and
         budget applicable to the household size;
    2. Must allow up to an additional ten thousand dollars in assets;
    3. Must require the payment of a premium that is based upon a sliding scale which may
         not be less than two and one-half percent nor more than seven and one-half percent of
         the individual's gross countable income;
    4. Must include a one-time program enrollment fee of one hundred dollars;
    5. Must provide that the failure of an enrolled individual to pay premiums for three months
         may result in the termination of enrollment in the program; and
    6. May not require the payment of a premium or enrollment fee or disenroll an individual
         for failure to pay a premium or enrollment fee for workers with disabilities coverage
         during a federally declared emergency if collection of the premium or enrollment fee
         may impact the receipt of federal funds.

    50-24.1-02.8. Transfers involving annuities.
    1. For purposes of this section, "annuity" means a policy, certificate, contract, or other
         arrangement between two or more parties under which one party pays money or other
         valuable consideration to the other party in return for the right to receive payments in
         the future.
    2. The purchase of an annuity on or after February 8, 2006, or the selection or alteration
         on or after February 8, 2006, of a payment option for an annuity purchased at any
         time, is a disqualifying transfer of an asset for purposes of this chapter unless:
         a. The state is named as the remainder beneficiary in the first position for at least
               the total amount of medical assistance paid on behalf of the annuitant or the state
               is named in the second position after the community spouse or minor or disabled
               child and is named in the first position if the community spouse or a
               representative of the minor or disabled child disposes of any remainder for less
               than fair market value;
         b. The annuity is purchased from an insurance company or other commercial
               company that sells annuities as part of the normal course of business;
         c. The annuity is irrevocable and neither the annuity nor payments due under the
               annuity may be assigned or transferred;
         d. The annuity provides substantially equal monthly payments of principal and
               interest and does not have a balloon or deferred payment of principal or interest.
               Payments will be considered substantially equal if the total annual payment in any
               year varies by five percent or less from the payment in the previous year; and
         e. The annuity will return the full principal and interest within the purchaser's life
               expectancy as determined in accordance with actuarial publications of the office
               of the chief actuary of the social security administration.
    3. Except for the provision in subdivision a of subsection 2, this section does not apply to:
         a. An annuity described in subsection b or q of section 408 of the Internal Revenue
               Code of 1986; or
         b. An annuity purchased with proceeds from:


                                           Page No. 4
               (1)   An account or trust described in subsection a, c, or p of section 408 of the
                     Internal Revenue Code of 1986;
               (2)   A simplified employee pension within the meaning of subsection k of
                     section 408 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986; or
               (3)   A Roth IRA described in section 408A of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.

    50-24.1-02.9. Effect of purchase of long-term care insurance on eligibility for medical
assistance benefits.
    Repealed by S.L. 2007, ch. 421, § 3.

    50-24.1-02.10. Real estate taxes on rental property as deduction from rental income.
    For purposes of determining the treatment of income and the application of income to the
cost of care for medical assistance eligibility for an individual screened as requiring nursing care
services, and who is receiving home and community-based services or nursing care services,
the department shall allow as a deduction from countable gross rental income the real estate
taxes for rental property if the individual is responsible for paying the real estate taxes for that
property.

    50-24.1-03. County share of medical assistance - Reimbursement for clinic services
not required.
    Repealed by S.L. 1997, ch. 403, § 13.

    50-24.1-03.1. Duties of human service zone and department.
    In the administration of the medical assistance program, the department or a human service
zone shall investigate and record the circumstances of each applicant or recipient of assistance,
in order to ascertain the facts supporting the application, or the granting of assistance, and
obtain such other information as directed by the department or as may be required by the rules
and regulations of the department.

   50-24.1-03.2. Investigations - Power of human service zones, department, and
employees.
   1. In the investigation of applications under the provisions of this chapter, the human
        service zones, the department, and the officials and employees of such agencies
        charged with the administration and enforcement of this chapter may:
        a. Conduct examinations;
        b. Require the attendance of witnesses and the production of books, records, and
              papers; and
        c. Make application to the district court of the county to compel the attendance of
              witnesses and the production of books, records, and papers.
   2. The department may request from other state, county, human service zones, and local
        agencies information deemed necessary to carry out the medical support enforcement
        program. All officers and employees of state, county, and local agencies shall
        cooperate with the department in locating absent spouses or parents of children to
        whom an obligation of support is owed or on whose behalf assistance is being
        provided and, on request, shall supply the department with available information
        relative to the location, income, social security number, and property holdings of the
        absent spouse or parent, notwithstanding any provision of law making that information
        confidential. Any person acting under the authority of the department who, pursuant to
        this subsection, obtains information from the office of the state tax commissioner, the
        confidentiality of which is protected by law, may not divulge such information except to
        the extent necessary for the administration of the medical support enforcement
        program or when otherwise directed by judicial order or when otherwise provided by
        law.
   3. The officers and employees designated by the human service zones or the department
        may administer oaths and affirmations.


                                            Page No. 5
    50-24.1-03.3. Criminal background investigation - Fingerprinting required.
    1. When the department determines a criminal history record check is appropriate, a
         provider applicant, a provider, or an individual with a five percent or more direct or
         indirect ownership interest in the provider applicant or provider shall secure, from any
         agency authorized to take fingerprints, two sets of fingerprints and shall provide all
         other information necessary to secure state criminal history record information and a
         nationwide background check under federal law.
    2. The applicant provider or provider shall assure the information obtained under
         subsection 1 is provided to the department within thirty days of the notice date.
    3. The department shall submit the information and fingerprints to the bureau of criminal
         investigation to determine if there is any criminal history record information regarding
         the applicant provider, provider, or an individual with a five percent or more direct or
         indirect ownership interest in the provider applicant or provider in accordance with
         section 12-60-24.
    4. The bureau of criminal investigation shall request a nationwide background check from
         the federal bureau of investigation and, upon receipt of response, provide the
         response of the federal bureau of investigation to the department. The bureau also
         shall provide any criminal history record information that lawfully may be made
         available under chapter 12-60 to the department.
    5. The results of the investigations must be forwarded to the department.
    6. Upon request by the applicant provider, provider, or an individual with a five percent or
         more direct or indirect ownership interest in the provider applicant or provider, a law
         enforcement agency shall take fingerprints of individuals described in this section if the
         request is made for purposes of this section.
    7. The applicant provider, provider, or an individual with a five percent or more direct or
         indirect ownership interest in the provider applicant or provider shall pay the cost of
         securing fingerprints, any criminal history record information made available under
         chapter 12-60, and a nationwide background check.
    8. The department may charge a fee not to exceed the actual cost for the purpose of
         processing the background investigations.
    9. An agency that takes fingerprints as provided under this section may charge a
         reasonable fee to offset the cost of the fingerprinting.
   10. The department may use the background information findings to determine approval of
         Medicaid services provider application or termination of enrollment as a Medicaid
         services provider. An individual denied or terminated as a Medicaid service provider as
         a result of the background investigation may not be qualified to enroll as a provider,
         have five percent or greater ownership or control interest in a Medicaid services
         provider, or submit claims for reimbursement through the department's Medicaid
         management information system.

    50-24.1-04. Authority of department.
    The department may adopt rules and regulations as necessary to qualify for any federal
funds available under this chapter.

    50-24.1-05. Date effective.
    The effective date of this chapter is the date on which federal funds become available for
the purposes and program outlined herein.

   50-24.1-06. Remedial eye care - When provided.
   Repealed by S.L. 2021, ch. 371, § 4.

   50-24.1-07. Recovery from estate of medical assistance recipient.
   1. On the death of any recipient of medical assistance who was a resident of a nursing
        facility, intermediate care facility for individuals with intellectual disabilities, or other
        medical institution and with respect to whom the department determined that resident


                                            Page No. 6
     reasonably was not expected to be discharged from the medical institution and to
     return home, or who was fifty-five years of age or older when the recipient received the
     assistance, and on the death of the spouse of the deceased recipient, the total amount
     of medical assistance paid on behalf of the recipient following the institutionalization of
     the recipient who cannot reasonably be expected to be discharged from the medical
     institution, or following the recipient's fifty-fifth birthday, as the case may be, must be
     allowed as a preferred claim against the decedent's estate after payment, in the
     following order, of:
     a. Recipient liability expense applicable to the month of death for nursing home or
           basic care services;
     b. Funeral expenses not in excess of three thousand five hundred dollars;
     c. Expenses of the last illness, other than those incurred by medical assistance;
     d. Expenses of administering the estate, including attorney's fees approved by the
           court;
     e. Claims made under chapter 50-01;
      f. Claims made under chapter 50-24.5;
     g. Claims made under chapter 50-06.3 and on behalf of the state hospital;
     h. Claims made under chapter 54-68; and
      i. Claims made under subsection 4.
2.   a. A claim may not be required to be paid nor may interest begin to accrue during
           the lifetime of the decedent's surviving spouse, if any, nor while there is a
           surviving child who is under the age of twenty-one years or is blind or
           permanently and totally disabled, but no timely filed claim may be disallowed
           because of the provisions of this section.
     b. The department may not file a claim against an estate to recover payments made
           on behalf of a recipient who was eligible for Medicaid under section 50-24.1-37
           and who received coverage through a private carrier.
3.   Every personal representative, upon the granting of letters of administration or
     testamentary shall forward to the department a copy of the petition or application
     commencing probate, heirship proceedings, or joint tenancy tax clearance
     proceedings in the respective district court, together with a list of the names of the
     legatees, devisees, surviving joint tenants, and heirs at law of the estate. Unless a
     properly filed claim of the department is paid in full, the personal representative shall
     provide to the department a statement of assets and disbursements in the estate.
4.   A claim of the department made against the decedent's estate of a recipient of medical
     assistance who was a full-benefit dual-eligible recipient, or against the decedent's
     estate of the spouse of a deceased recipient of medical assistance who was a
     full-benefit dual-eligible recipient, must include a claim for an amount equal to the
     amount required to be paid each month under 42 U.S.C. 1396u-5(c)(1)(A), or a
     substantially similar federal law, which reasonably may be attributable to benefits paid
     on behalf of the deceased recipient in a month during which the deceased recipient
     received medical assistance under this chapter and was eligible for Medicare.
5.   All assets in the decedent's estate of the spouse of a deceased medical assistance
     recipient are presumed to be assets in which that recipient had an interest at the time
     of the recipient's death.
6.   To the extent a claim for repayment of medical assistance arises for services provided
     in months during which the department has in effect an approved state plan
     amendment that provides for the disregard of assets in an amount equal to the
     insurance benefit payments that are made to or on behalf of an individual who is a
     beneficiary of an insurance policy under a qualified state long-term care insurance
     partnership, the department's claim need not be paid out of assets of the decedent's
     estate of a recipient of medical assistance, or assets of the decedent's estate of the
     spouse of such a recipient, of a value equal to an amount the estate demonstrates
     was paid for long-term care provided to the recipient of medical assistance during
     those months by that insurance policy.
7.   For purposes of this section:

                                        Page No. 7
         a.   "Full-benefit dual-eligible" has the meaning provided in 42 U.S.C. 1396u-5; and
         b.   "Qualified state long-term care insurance partnership" has the meaning provided
              in 42 U.S.C. 1396p(b).
    8.   In any probate proceedings in which the department has filed a claim under this
         section, no additional evidence of foundation may be required for the admission of the
         department's payment record supporting the department's claim if the payment record
         is certified as a true copy and bears the signature of a representative of the
         department. There is a rebuttable presumption that the amount of medical assistance
         on the claim was incurred and paid on behalf of the recipient of medical assistance
         and is an allowable claim.

    50-24.1-08. Statute of limitations does not run.
    The statute of limitations does not run against claims of the state of North Dakota for
repayment of medical assistance provided under this chapter.

    50-24.1-09. Reimbursement of long-term care facility - Limitation - Allowable costs.
    Repealed by S.L. 1987, ch. 582, § 30.

    50-24.1-10. Joint Medicaid payment account - Educationally related services.
    Repealed by S.L. 2019, ch. 408, § 39.

     50-24.1-11. Joint Medicaid payment account - North Dakota vision services - school
for the blind.
     Repealed by S.L. 2019, ch. 408, § 39.

    50-24.1-12. Medical assistance - Services provided by psychologists.
    Within the limits of legislative appropriations, the department shall provide medical
assistance to eligible recipients for services provided by psychologists licensed under chapter
43-32.

    50-24.1-13. Provider reimbursement rates.
    Repealed by S.L. 2019, ch. 408, § 39.

    50-24.1-14. Responsibility for expenditures.
    Notwithstanding section 50-24.1-34, expenditures required under this chapter are the
responsibility of the federal government or the state of North Dakota.

     50-24.1-15. Prehospital emergency medical services.
     Medical assistance coverage must include prehospital emergency medical services benefits
in the case of a medical condition that manifests itself by symptoms of sufficient severity which
may include severe pain and which a prudent layperson who possesses an average knowledge
of health and medicine could reasonably expect the absence of medical attention to result in
placing the person's health in jeopardy, serious impairment of a bodily function, or serious
dysfunction of any body part. A medical assistance claim that meets the prudent layperson
standard of this section may not be denied by the department on the basis that the prehospital
emergency medical services were not medically necessary or that a medical emergency did not
exist.

    50-24.1-16. Reimbursement of ambulance services.
    1. Medical assistance coverage must include reimbursement of ambulance services for
         responding to calls to assist covered individuals which do not result in transport.
    2. For purposes of classifying ambulance services under this section:
         a. An emergency response is one that at the time the ambulance is called the
              ambulance responds immediately. An immediate response is one in which the


                                           Page No. 8
              ambulance begins as quickly as possible to take the steps necessary to respond
              to the call.
         b.   An advanced life support assessment is an assessment performed by an
              advanced life support crew as part of an emergency response that was
              necessary because the patient's reported condition at the time of the dispatch
              was such that only an advanced life support crew was qualified to perform the
              assessment. An advanced life support assessment does not necessarily result in
              a determination that the patient requires an advanced life support level of service.

    50-24.1-16.1. Continuous glucose monitoring devices.
    Medical assistance coverage, including Medicaid Expansion, must include coverage of a
continuous glucose monitoring device for a covered individual.

    50-24.1-17. Medical assistance for breast or cervical cancer.
    The department may provide medical assistance for individuals screened and found to have
breast or cervical cancer in accordance with the federal Breast and Cervical Cancer Prevention
and Treatment Act of 2000 [Pub. L. 106-354; 114 Stat. 1381; 42 U.S.C. 1396a et seq.]. The
department shall establish an income eligibility limit that may not exceed two hundred percent of
the most recently revised poverty line published by the federal office of management and
budget applicable to the household size.

    50-24.1-18. Personal care option - Residential habilitation - Community support
services.
    1. The department shall implement personal care services.
    2. The department may implement residential habilitation and community support
         services in a residential setting or private residence that would allow for the delegation
         of administration of medication by an employee of a qualified service provider agency.
         The qualified service provider agency shall employ or contract with a licensed
         registered nurse to provide supervision to the employees of a qualified service
         provider agency who are administering routine medications. The employees of a
         qualified service provider agency shall complete department-approved training on the
         administration of routine medications before administering routine medications. The
         department shall adopt rules as are necessary to establish and govern residential
         habilitation and community support services in a residential setting or private
         residence.

    50-24.1-18.1. Consumer-directed health maintenance services - Residing at home.
    Repealed by S.L. 2021, ch. 12, § 35.

    50-24.1-19. Oral maxillofacial services - Medical necessity.
    Repealed by S.L. 2019, ch. 408, § 39.

    50-24.1-20. Home and community-based living - Choice of options.
    Any aged or disabled individual who is eligible for home and community-based living must
be allowed to choose, from among all service options available, the type of service that best
meets that individual's needs. To the extent permitted by any applicable waiver, the individual's
medical assistance funds must follow the individual for whichever service option the individual
selects, not to exceed the cost of the service.

    50-24.1-21. Department to submit plans and seek waivers.
    Repealed by S.L. 2007, ch. 421, § 3.

    50-24.1-22. Long-term care facility information.
    Repealed by S.L. 2019, ch. 408, § 39.


                                            Page No. 9
     50-24.1-23. Long-term care facility resident - Medical assistance eligibility.
     An individual is not ineligible for medical assistance if application of disqualifying transfer
provisions would deprive the individual of nursing care and services and the individual makes a
satisfactory showing that:
     1. For periods after the return, all income or assets constituting the disqualifying transfer
          have been transferred or assigned back to the individual and the individual is
          otherwise eligible for medical assistance; or
     2. Compensation equal to the fair market value of the income or asset at time of transfer
          is paid to, or on behalf of, the individual for nursing care and services provided by a
          long-term care facility and the individual is otherwise eligible for medical assistance.

    50-24.1-24. Provider appeals - Definitions.
    1. For purposes of this section:
         a. "Denial of payment" means that the department has denied payment for a
               medical assistance claim or reduced the level of service payment for a service
               provided to an individual who was an eligible medical assistance recipient at the
               time the service was provided or the recoupment or adjustment of a claim, or part
               of a claim, following an audit or review.
         b. "Provider" means an individual, entity, or facility that furnishes medical or
               remedial services or supplies pursuant to a provider agreement with the
               department or a third-party billing agency of the provider.
    2. A provider may request a review of denial of payment under this section by filing a
         written request for review with the department within thirty days of the date of the
         department's denial of payment. The written request for review must include the
         remittance advice or the notice of recoupment or adjustment and a statement of each
         disputed item with the reason or basis for the dispute. A provider may not request
         review under this section of the rate paid for a particular service or for a full or partial
         denial, recoupment, or adjustment of a claim due to required federal or state changes,
         payment system defects, or improper claims submission.
    3. Within thirty days after requesting a review, a provider shall provide to the department
         all documents, written statements, exhibits, and other written information that support
         the provider's request for review, together with a computation and the dollar amount
         that reflects the provider's claim as to the correct computation and dollar amount for
         each disputed item.
    4. The department shall assign to a provider's request for review someone other than any
         individual who was involved in the initial denial of the claim. A provider who has
         requested review may contact the department for an informal conference regarding the
         review anytime before the department has issued its final decision.
    5. The department shall make and issue a final decision within seventy-five days of
         receipt of the notice for review, if the department has denied payment for a medical
         assistance claim or reduced the level of service payment for a service. The department
         shall make and issue a decision within seventy-five days, or as soon thereafter as
         possible, of receipt of the notice of request for review, if the department has recouped
         or adjusted a claim, or part of a claim, following an audit. The department's final
         decision must conform to the requirements of section 28-32-39. A provider may appeal
         the final decision of the department to the district court in the manner provided in
         section 28-32-42, and the district court shall review the department's final decision in
         the manner provided in section 28-32-46. The judgment of the district court in an
         appeal from a request for review may be reviewed in the supreme court on appeal by
         any party in the same manner as provided in section 28-32-49.
    6. Upon receipt of notice that the provider has appealed its final decision to the district
         court, the department shall make a record of all documents, written statements,
         exhibits, and other written information submitted by the provider or the department in
         connection with the request for review and the department's final decision on review,
         which constitutes the entire record. Within thirty days after an appeal has been taken
         to district court as provided in this section, the department shall prepare and file in the

                                            Page No. 10
         office of the clerk of the district court in which the appeal is pending the original and a
         certified copy of the entire record, and that record must be treated as the record on
         appeal for purposes of section 28-32-44.

    50-24.1-25. Operating costs for developmental disabilities service providers.
    Repealed by S.L. 2019, ch. 408, § 39.

    50-24.1-26. Medicaid waivers - In-home services.
    The department shall administer Medicaid waivers to provide in-home services to children
with extraordinary medical needs and to children diagnosed with an autism spectrum disorder
who are under the age of twenty-one and would otherwise meet institutional level of care. The
department may prioritize applicants for the waiver for children with extraordinary medical needs
by degree of need.

    50-24.1-27. Medical assistance program management.
    Repealed by S.L. 2019, ch. 408, § 39.

    50-24.1-28. Medical assistance and Medicare prescription drug management program.
    The department may not pay for:
    1. A prescription drug that is within a class of drugs covered under the Medicare
         Prescription Drug, Improvement, and Modernization Act of 2003 [Pub. L. 108-173;
         117 Stat. 2066; 42 U.S.C. 1396kk-1] and which is prescribed to a medical assistance
         recipient who is also a Medicare beneficiary.
    2. A prescription drug that is not covered and for which no drug in its class is covered
         under the Medicare Prescription Drug, Improvement, and Modernization Act of 2003
         [Pub. L. 108-173; 117 Stat. 2066; 42 U.S.C. 1396kk-1] and which is prescribed for an
         individual who is a medical assistance recipient and a Medicare beneficiary unless
         federal medical assistance matching funds are available at no less than the federal
         medical assistance percentage and the department determines that the drug is
         medically necessary for the individual.

    50-24.1-28.1. Pharmacy management program.
    The department shall establish a pharmacy management program to be used by the
medical assistance program for Medicaid expansion for prescription drug coverage. The
department shall process claims through the department's existing pharmacy claims system and
Medicaid management information system and provide the contracted managed care plan with
a daily pharmacy claims file for Medicaid expansion recipients.

    50-24.1-29. Insurers to provide certain information to the department.
    1. For purposes of this section:
         a. "Department" means the department of health and human services or its agent.
         b. "Health insurer" includes self-insured plans, group health plans as defined in
              section 607(1) of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974
              [29 U.S.C. 1167(1)], service benefit plans, managed care organizations,
              pharmacy benefit managers, or other parties that legally are responsible by
              statute, contract, or agreement for payment of a claim for a health care item or
              service.
    2. a. As a condition of doing business in this state, health insurers shall provide to the
              department upon its request and in a manner prescribed by the department
              information about individuals who are eligible for medical assistance so the
              department may determine during what period the individual or the individual's
              spouse or dependents may be or may have been covered by a health insurer and
              the nature of the coverage provided by the health insurer, including the name,
              address, identifying number of the plan, and duration of the health insurance
              coverage. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, every health insurer, not


                                           Page No. 11
          more frequently than twelve times in a year, shall provide to the department upon
          its request information, including automated data matches conducted under the
          direction of the department, as necessary, to:
          (1) Identify individuals covered under the insurer's health benefit plans who are
                 also recipients of medical assistance;
          (2) Determine the period during which the individual or the individual's spouse
                 or the individual's dependents may be or may have been covered by the
                 health benefit plan; and
          (3) Determine the nature of the coverage.
     b. The insurer must provide the information required in this subsection to the
          department at no cost if the information is in a readily available structure or
          format. If the department requests the information in a structure or format that is
          not readily available, the insurer may charge a reasonable fee for providing the
          information, not to exceed the actual cost of providing the information.
3.   To facilitate the department in obtaining the information required by this section, a
     health insurer shall:
     a. Cooperate with the department to determine whether a medical assistance
          recipient may be covered under the insurer's health benefit plan and is eligible to
          receive benefits under the health benefit plan for services provided under the
          medical assistance program.
     b. Respond to the request for information within ninety days after receipt of written
          proof of loss or claim for payment for health care services provided to a recipient
          of medical assistance who is covered by the insurer's health benefit plan.
     c. Accept the department's right of recovery, entitlement to payment, and the
          assignment to the department of any right of an individual or other entity to
          payment from a liable third party for an item or service for which payment has
          been made under the state medical assistance plan.
     d. Respond to any inquiry by the department within sixty days regarding a claim for
          payment for any health care item or service that is submitted no later than three
          years after the date of the provision of the health care item or service.
     e. Agree not to deny a claim submitted by the department solely on the basis of the
          date of submission of the claim, the type of format of the claim form, or a failure to
          present proper documentation at the point of sale that is the basis of the claim if:
          (1) The claim is submitted by the department within the three-year period
                 beginning on the date on which the item or service was furnished; and
          (2) Any action by the department to enforce its rights with respect to such claim
                 is commenced within six years of the department's submission of the claim.
      f. Accept Medicaid's authorization that the item or service is covered under the
          state plan as if the authorization were the prior authorization made by the third
          party for the item or service.
     g. Agree to not deny a claim submitted by the department for failure to obtain prior
          authorization for an item or service.
4.   A health insurer is prohibited, in enrolling an individual or on the individual's behalf,
     from taking into account that the individual is eligible for or is provided medical
     assistance.
5.   The department may not use or disclose any information provided by the insurer other
     than as permitted or required by law. The insurer may not be held liable for the release
     of insurance information to the department or a department agent if the release is
     authorized under this section.

50-24.1-30. Third-party liability recovery.
1. The department shall seek recovery of reimbursement from a third party up to the full
     amount of medical assistance paid.
2. A medical assistance recipient shall inform the department of any rights the recipient
     has to third-party benefits and shall inform the department of the name and address of
     any individual, entity, or program that is or may be liable to provide third-party benefits.

                                        Page No. 12
3.   A release or satisfaction of a cause of action, suit, claim, counterclaim, demand,
     judgment, settlement, or settlement agreement is not valid or effectual as against a
     claim created under this chapter unless the department joins in the release or
     satisfaction or executes a release of its claim.
4.   The department shall recover the full amount of all medical assistance provided on
     behalf of a recipient to the full extent of third-party benefits received by the recipient or
     the department for medical expenses. The department shall recover the third-party
     benefits directly from any third party or from the recipient or legal representative, if the
     recipient or legal representative has received third-party benefits, up to the amount of
     medical assistance provided to the recipient.
5.   An applicant for or recipient of medical assistance shall cooperate in the recovery of
     third-party benefits.
6.   To enforce its rights to third-party benefits, the department may institute, intervene in,
     or join any legal or administrative proceeding in its own name.
     a. If either the recipient or the department brings an action against a third party, the
           recipient or the department must provide to the other within thirty days after
           commencing the action written notice by personal delivery or registered mail of
           the action, the name of the court in which the case is brought, the case number of
           such action, and a copy of the pleadings. If either the department or the recipient
           brings an action, the other may become a party to or may consolidate an action
           brought independently with the other.
     b. A judgment, award, or settlement of a claim in an action by a recipient to recover
           damages for injuries or other third-party benefits in which the department has an
           interest may not be satisfied or released without first giving the department notice
           and a reasonable opportunity to file and satisfy its claim or proceed with any
           action as otherwise permitted by law.
7.   Any transfer or encumbrance of any right, title, or interest to which the department has
     a right with the intent, likelihood, or practical effect of defeating, hindering, or reducing
     recovery by the department for reimbursement of medical assistance provided to a
     recipient is void and of no effect against the claim of the department.
8.   A recipient who has notice or who has actual knowledge of the department's rights to
     third-party benefits who receives any third-party benefit or proceeds for a covered
     illness or injury is either required to pay the department within sixty days after receipt
     of settlement proceeds the full amount of the third-party benefits up to the total medical
     assistance provided or to place a sum equal to the full amount of the total medical
     assistance provided in a trust account pending judicial or administrative determination
     of the department's right to the third-party benefits.
9.   Notwithstanding any provision in this section to the contrary, the department is not
     required to seek reimbursement from, or may reduce or compromise a claim against, a
     liable third party on claims for which the amount it reasonably expects to recover will
     be less than the cost of recovery or for which recovery efforts will not be cost-effective.
     Cost-effectiveness is determined based on the following:
     a. Actual and legal issues of liability as may exist between the recipient and the
           liable party;
     b. Total funds available for settlement; and
     c. An estimate of the cost to the department of pursuing its claim.

50-24.1-31. Optional medical assistance for families of children with disabilities.
1. The department shall establish and implement a buyin program under the federal
     Family Opportunity Act enacted as part of the Deficit Reduction Act of 2005 [Pub. L.
     109-171; 120 Stat. 4; 42 U.S.C. 1396] to provide medical assistance and other health
     coverage options to families of children with disabilities and whose net income does
     not exceed two hundred fifty percent of the federal poverty line published by the
     federal office of management and budget applicable to the household size.
2. The department may not require the payment of a premium or disenroll an individual
     for failure to pay a premium for families of children with disabilities coverage during a

                                        Page No. 13
         federally declared emergency if collection of the premium may impact the receipt of
         federal funds.

   50-24.1-32. Medical assistance - Services provided by physician assistants and
advanced practice registered nurses - Primary care provider case management program.
   1. The medical assistance program must recognize physician assistants and advanced
        practice registered nurses with the roles of nurse practitioner or certified nurse midwife
        as primary care providers with the same rights and responsibilities given primary care
        physicians under the medical assistance program. Any care provided by the physician
        assistant or advanced practice registered nurse with the roles of nurse practitioner or
        certified nurse midwife as a primary care provider under the medical assistance
        program must be within the scope of the physician assistant's or advanced practice
        registered nurse's respective license.
   2. The department shall eliminate the primary care provider case management program.

    50-24.1-33. Brain injury - Home and community-based services - Quality control.
    1. As part of the personal care services program for eligible medical assistance recipients
         and as part of the department's services for eligible disabled and elderly individuals,
         the department shall provide home and community-based services to individuals who
         have a brain injury and meet the functional eligibility criteria for receipt of services.
    2. The department shall conduct quality control activities and make training available to
         case managers and other persons providing services to individuals under this section.

    50-24.1-34. Processing of claims submitted on behalf of inmates.
    The department of health and human services shall process claims submitted by enrolled
medical providers on behalf of inmates at county jails. Each county shall pay the department for
the paid amount for the claims processed and also a processing fee for each claim submission.
The department may establish a processing fee that may not exceed fifty dollars and shall
update the fee annually on July first. The processing fee must be based on the actual costs to
the department of the claims processing operations divided by the annual volume of claims
submitted. The department shall invoice each county for payment of the processing fee.

    50-24.1-35. Department to expand Medicaid coverage.
    The department shall ensure Medicaid coverage includes Medicaid-covered services
provided to an inmate of the department of corrections and rehabilitation or a county jail who
would be eligible for Medicaid if the inmate were not incarcerated and who is admitted to an
inpatient setting.

    50-24.1-36. Civil sanction - Costs recoverable - Interest - Appeals.
    1. For purposes of this section:
         a. "Affiliate" means a person having an overt or covert relationship each with
               another person in a manner that one person directly or indirectly controls or has
               the power to control another.
         b. "Provider" means any individual or entity furnishing Medicaid services under a
               provider agreement with the department.
    2. A provider, an affiliate of a provider, or any combination of provider and affiliates, is
         liable to the department for up to twenty-five percent of the amount the department
         was induced to pay as a result of each act of fraud or abuse. This sanction is in
         addition to the applicable rules established by the department.
    3. A provider, an affiliate of a provider, or any combination of provider and affiliates, is
         liable to the department for up to five thousand dollars on each act of fraud or abuse
         which did not induce the department to make an erroneous payment. This sanction is
         in addition to the applicable rules established by the department.
    4. A provider, an affiliate of a provider, or any combination of provider and affiliates, that
         is assessed a civil sanction by the department also shall reimburse the department


                                           Page No. 14
     investigation fees, costs, and expenses for any investigation and action brought under
     this section.
5.   Unless otherwise provided in a judgment entered against a provider or against an
     affiliate of the provider, overpayments and sanctions accrue interest at the legal rate
     beginning thirty days after the department provides written notice to the provider or the
     affiliate of the provider.
6.   a. A provider or an affiliate of a provider who is assessed a sanction may request a
            review of the sanction by filing within thirty days of the date of the department's
            notice of sanction a written notice with the department which includes a statement
            of each disputed item and the reason or basis for the dispute.
     b. A provider or an affiliate of a provider may not request review under this section if
            the sanction imposed is termination or suspension and the notice of sanction
            states that the basis for the sanction is either:
            (1) The provider's or affiliate's failure to meet standards of licensure,
                   certification, or registration where those standards are imposed by state or
                   federal law as a condition to participation in the Medicaid program; or
            (2) The provider or affiliate has been similarly sanctioned by the Medicare
                   program or by another state's Medicaid program.
     c. Within thirty days after requesting a review, a provider or affiliate shall provide to
            the department all documents, written statements, exhibits, and other written
            information that supports the request for review.
     d. The department shall assign a provider's or affiliate's request for review to
            someone other than an individual who was involved in imposing the sanction. A
            provider or affiliate who has requested review may contact the department for an
            informal conference regarding the review any time before the department has
            issued its final decision.
     e. The department shall make and issue its final decision within seventy-five days of
            receipt of the notice of request for review. The department's final decision must
            conform to the requirements of section 28-32-39. A provider or affiliate may
            appeal the final decision of the department to the district court in the manner
            provided in section 28-32-42, and the district court shall review the department's
            final decision in the manner provided in section 28-32-46. The judgment of the
            district court in an appeal from a request for review may be reviewed in the
            supreme court on appeal by any party in the same manner as provided in section
            28-32-49.
      f. Upon receipt of notice that the provider or affiliate has appealed its final decision
            to the district court, the department shall make a record of all documents, written
            statements, exhibits, and other written information submitted by the provider,
            affiliate, or the department in connection with the request for review and the
            department's final decision on review, which constitutes the entire record. Within
            thirty days after an appeal has been taken to district court as provided in this
            section, the department shall prepare and file in the office of the clerk of the
            district court in which the appeal is pending the original and a certified copy of the
            entire record, and that record must be treated as the record on appeal for
            purposes of section 28-32-44.
7.   Determinations of medical necessity may not lead to imposition of remedies, duties,
     prohibitions, and sanctions under this section.
8.   The remedies, duties, prohibitions, and sanctions of this section are not exclusive and
     are in addition to all other causes of action, remedies, penalties, and sanctions
     otherwise provided by law or by provider agreement.
9.   The state's share of all civil sanctions, investigation fees, costs, expenses, and interest
     received by the department under this section must be deposited into the general fund.




                                        Page No. 15
   50-24.1-37. Medicaid expansion - Legislative management report. (Contingent repeal -
See note)
    1. The department shall expand medical assistance coverage as authorized by the
        federal Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act [Pub. L. 111-148], as amended by
        the Health Care and Education Reconciliation Act of 2010 [Pub. L. 111-152] to
        individuals under sixty-five years of age with income below one hundred thirty-eight
        percent of the federal poverty line published by the federal office of management and
        budget applicable to the household size.
    2. The department shall inform new enrollees in the medical assistance expansion
        program that benefits may be reduced or eliminated if federal participation decreases
        or is eliminated.
    3. Except for pharmacy services and coverages for individuals ages nineteen and twenty,
        the department shall implement the expansion by bidding through private carriers or
        utilizing the health insurance exchange.
    4. The contract between the department and the private carrier must provide the
        department with full access to provider reimbursement rates. The department shall
        consider provider reimbursement rate information in selecting a private carrier under
        this section. Before August first of each even-numbered year, the department shall
        submit a report to the legislative management regarding provider reimbursement rates
        under the medical assistance expansion program.
    5. Provider and managed care organization reimbursement rate information received or
        held by the department under this section is an open record.

   50-24.1-38. Health-related services - Licensed emergency medical services personnel.
   1. Medical assistance must cover services provided by community emergency medical
        services personnel, and other similarly licensed personnel who are licensed or certified
        under section 23-27-04.3, if the services are provided to an eligible recipient as
        defined by rule. Community emergency medical services personnel services may
        include health assessment, chronic disease monitoring and education, immunizations
        and vaccinations, laboratory specimen collection, followup care, comprehensive health
        and safety assessment, wound management, assess and report compliance with
        established care plan, medication management, and other interventions within the
        scope of practice for each licensure level as approved by a supervising physician,
        physician assistant, or advanced practice registered nurse.
   2. The department shall adopt rules governing payments to licensed community
        emergency medical services personnel, advanced emergency medical technicians,
        and emergency medical technicians for health-related services provided to recipients
        of medical assistance, subject to necessary limitations and exclusions. A physician, a
        physician assistant, or an advanced practice registered nurse must supervise any care
        provided by a licensed community emergency medical services personnel, an
        advanced emergency medical technician, or an emergency medical technician.

    50-24.1-39. Behavioral health services - Licensed marriage and family therapists.
    Beginning January 1, 2016, the department shall allow licensed marriage and family
therapists to enroll and be eligible for payment for behavioral health services provided to
recipients of medical assistance, subject to limitations and exclusions the department
determines necessary.

   50-24.1-40. Medical assistance - Tribal health care coordination agreements -
Continuing appropriation - Report to legislative management.
   1. As used in this section:
        a. "Care coordination agreement" means an agreement between a health care
             provider and tribal health care organization which will result in one hundred
             percent federal funding for eligible medical assistance provided to an American
             Indian.


                                         Page No. 16
         b.    "Tribal health care organization" means Indian health services or a tribal entity
               providing health care under the federal Indian Self-Determination and Education
               Assistance Act of 1975 [Pub. L. 93-638; 88 Stat. 2203; 25 U.S.C. 5301 et seq.].
    2.   The department shall facilitate care coordination agreements. Of any federal funding
         received in excess of the state's regular share of federal medical assistance funding
         which results from care coordination agreements, the department shall deposit eighty
         percent in the tribal health care coordination fund and twenty percent in the general
         fund.
    3.   There is created in the state treasury a tribal health care coordination fund.
         a. Moneys in the fund are appropriated to the department on a continuing basis for
               distribution to a tribal government in accordance with an agreement between the
               department and a tribal government. The agreement between the department
               and a tribal government must require the tribe to:
               (1) Use the money distributed under this section for purposes related to the
                     ten essential services of public health identified by the federal centers for
                     disease control and prevention and the development or enhancement of
                     community health representative programs or services.
               (2) Submit to the department annual reports detailing the use of the money
                     distributed under this section.
               (3) Submit to the department every two years an audit report, conducted by an
                     independent licensed certified public accountant, of the tribal government
                     use of the money distributed under this section. A tribal government may
                     use money distributed under this section to pay for this audit report. At the
                     discretion of a tribal government, an audit may be conducted more often
                     than every two years.
         b. The distribution of moneys from the fund to a tribal government must be in
               proportion to the federal funding received from care coordination agreement
               requests for services originating from within that tribal nation.
         c. At least annually, upon completion of any auditing and verification actions of the
               department, the department shall distribute moneys from the fund to the tribal
               government.
         d. If a tribal government fails to file with the department a timely annual report or
               audit report, the department shall withhold distribution of moneys from the fund to
               the tribal government until the report is filed.
         e. If an audit report or the department's review of the annual report finds a tribal
               government used moneys distributed from the fund for a purpose inconsistent
               with this section, the department shall withhold future distributions to that tribal
               government in an amount equal to the money used improperly. The department
               shall distribute money withheld from a tribal government under this subdivision if
               a future audit report indicates moneys distributed from the fund are used for
               purposes consistent with this section.
    4.   Before August of each even-numbered year, the department shall compile and
         summarize the annual reports and audit reports from the participating tribal
         governments data and provide the legislative management with a biennial report on
         the fund. Each participating tribe shall compile data and provide the legislative
         management with a biennial report on the tribe's use of money distributed from the
         fund.

    50-24.1-41. Medical assistance benefits - Pregnant women - Postpartum.
    The department shall seek the necessary approval from the centers for Medicare and
Medicaid services to expand medical assistance coverage for pregnant women with income
below one hundred seventy-five percent of the federal poverty level. Services under this section
must be for the duration of the pregnancy and the postpartum period consisting of the
twelve-month period beginning on the last day of the pregnancy.



                                           Page No. 17
    50-24.1-42. Automated clearing house payments to medical assistance providers and
provider applicants.
    The department shall provide payment to medical assistance providers and may provide
payments to provider applicants using an automated clearing house to provide for electronic
fund transfers. To receive payment, medical assistance providers and provider applicants shall
provide sufficient documentation to enable the department to provide electronic funds transfers
through an automated clearing house. No other forms of payment are permitted.

    50-24.1-43. Medical assistance benefits - Metabolic supplements.
    Medical assistance coverage must include coverage of a metabolic supplement if:
    1. The metabolic supplement has been identified and agreed to be covered by the
         department;
    2. The metabolic supplement is part of a standard recommendation for treatment;
    3. A suitable metabolic supplement that is a covered outpatient drug is not available;
    4. The individual is under nineteen years of age; and
    5. Payment is made at a rate determined by the department.

    50-24.1-44. Interpreter services.
    Medical assistance coverage, including Medicaid expansion, must include payment for sign
and oral language interpreter services for assistance in providing covered health care services
to a recipient of medical assistance who has limited English proficiency or who has hearing loss
and uses interpreting services. The department shall adopt rules to implement this section.

    50-24.1-45. Medical assistance benefits - Family adaptive behavior treatment and
guidance - Dental screening and assessments - Dental case management - Teledentistry.
    Medical assistance coverage must include payment for the following services:
    1. Family adaptive behavioral treatment and guidance to educate parents and caregivers
         to continue to carry out plans and recommendations of applied behavioral analysis.
    2. Dental screening and assessment of patients to identify individuals in need of
         additional assessment, diagnostic, and treatment services.
    3. Dental case management for maintenance of oral health for special populations,
         including elderly, special needs, medically fragile, and children.
    4. Asynchronous teledentistry to reduce barriers to dental care through outreach
         programs and to integrate oral health into general health care settings to identify and
         refer treatment needs.
    5. The services identified in subsections 2, 3, and 4 do not apply to Medicaid expansion.

    50-24.1-46. Dual special needs plan.
    By January 1, 2025, the department shall implement at least one dual special needs plan
for Medicare and Medicaid dual-eligible Medicaid recipients. The department shall establish
standards for care coordination services the dual special needs plan must provide to recipients.

   50-24.1-47. Family paid caregiver service pilot project. (Contingent expiration date -
See note)
    1. The department shall manage and operate the family paid caregiver service pilot
        project to make payments to a legally responsible individual who provides
        extraordinary care to an eligible individual who is a participant in the Medicaid 1915(c)
        waivers, excluding the home and community-based services aged and disabled
        waiver.
    2. The family paid caregiver service pilot project must include funding for extraordinary
        care, which means care:
        a. Exceeding the range of activities a legally responsible individual would ordinarily
             perform in the household on behalf of an individual without extraordinary medical
             or behavioral needs; and



                                           Page No. 18
         b.    Is necessary to assure the health and welfare and avoid institutionalization of the
               individual in need of care.
    3.   The department may adopt rules addressing management of the family paid caregiver
         service pilot project and establish the eligibility requirements and exclusions for the
         family paid caregiver service pilot project. The department shall manage and operate
         the family paid caregiver service pilot project in accordance with the adopted rules and
         within the limits of legislative appropriation for the family paid caregiver service pilot
         project. The department shall utilize an assessment of an eligible individual to
         determine the need for extraordinary care which must consider the unique needs and
         circumstances of applicants including age, activities of daily living, medical needs, and
         social emotional needs. The department may not make payments to a legally
         responsible individual which duplicate any care that is otherwise compensated through
         a service or assistance provided, administered, or supervised by the department,
         including Medicaid 1915(c) waiver or the Medicaid state plan. A legally responsible
         individual shall attest on an annual basis that the legally responsible individual agrees
         not to seek reimbursement for extraordinary care through the family paid caregiver
         service pilot project on days when other 1915(c) waiver services are paid by the
         department.
    4.   A decision on an application which is issued by the department under this section may
         be appealed as provided under chapter 28-32. An individual may not appeal a denial,
         a revocation, a reduction in payment, or the termination of the family paid caregiver
         service pilot project administered by the department due to the unavailability of funding
         received for the purpose of issuing payments as part of the family paid caregiver
         service pilot project for the biennium.
    5.   A payment under this section to a legally responsible individual must be
         commensurate with the rate for family caregiving in the home and community-based
         services aged and disabled waiver.
    6.   The cross-disability advisory council under section 50-06-46 shall participate with and
         provide feedback to the department on the planning, design, and ongoing
         implementation of the family paid caregiver service pilot project and future centers for
         Medicare and Medicaid services children's cross-disability 1915(c) waiver. The council
         shall provide input into the development of the assessment method used to determine
         the need for extraordinary care.

     50-24.1-48. Reimbursement of psychiatric residential treatment facilities.
     The department shall amend the rules for medical assistance reimbursement of psychiatric
residential treatment facilities for direct care costs, including the applicable costs related to
clinical supervisors, medical directors, engagement of families in care, therapeutic leave days,
and an administrative costs cap. Reimbursements for therapeutic leave days may not exceed
five hundred dollars per day. The department shall implement utilization controls, including
service authorization for therapeutic leave days.




                                           Page No. 19

