Source URL: https://www.law.cornell.edu/regulations/nebraska/471-Neb-Admin-Code-ch-38-SS-004
Retrieved: 2026-09-23

471 Neb. Admin. Code, ch. 38, § 004 - UNDUE HARDSHIP WAIVER | State Regulations | US Law | LII / Legal Information Institute 

 Please help us improve our site!

 × 

 No thank you 

 Skip to main content 

 Cornell Law
 School 
 Search
 Cornell 

 Toggle navigation 

 Please help
 us improve our site! 

 Support Us! 

 Search 

 About
 LII 

 Who We Are 

 What We Do 

 Who Pays For This 

 Contact Us 

 Get the
 law 

 Constitution 

 Supreme Court 

 U.S. Code 

 CFR 

 Federal Rules 

 Federal Rules of Appellate Procedure 

 Federal Rules of Civil Procedure 

 Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure 

 Federal Rules of Evidence 

 Federal Rules of Bankruptcy Procedure 

 U.C.C. 

 Law by jurisdiction 

 State law 

 Uniform laws 

 Federal law 

 World law 

 Lawyer directory 

 Legal encyclopedia 

 Business law 

 Constitutional law 

 Criminal law 

 Family law 

 Employment law 

 Money and Finances 

 More... 

 Help out 

 Give 

 Sponsor 

 Advertise 

 Create 

 Promote 

 Join Lawyer Directory 

 LII 

 State Regulations 

 Nebraska Administrative Code 

 Topic - HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES SYSTEM 

 Title 471 - NEBRASKA MEDICAL ASSISTANCE PROGRAM SERVICES 

 Chapter 38 - ESTATE RECOVERY 

 471 Neb. Admin. Code, ch. 38, § 004 - UNDUE HARDSHIP WAIVER

 471 Neb. Admin. Code, ch. 38, § 004 - UNDUE HARDSHIP WAIVER 

 State Regulations 

 Compare

 004.01 PURPOSE. Waivers granted by the Department based on undue hardship are a rare and extraordinary remedy intended to prevent the impoverishment of the deceased recipient's family if the Department were to pursue an estate-recovery claim. Anticipating or expecting an inheritance, or being inconvenienced economically by the lack of an inheritance, is not a valid basis for an undue-hardship waiver.

 004.02 HEIR. Any person who could be considered an heir of the now-deceased Medicaid recipient under the Probate Code may apply for an undue-hardship waiver.

 004.03 CRITERIA. Any of the following circumstances may constitute an undue hardship that results in a complete or partial waiver of claim: (A) An heir of the recipient resided in the recipient's home for two years prior to the recipient's entry into a nursing home and during that time provided the type and quantity of unreimbursed care that delayed the recipient's entry into a nursing home;

 (B) An heir of the recipient resided in the recipient's home for two years prior to the recipient's receipt of recoverable medical services and during that time provided the type and quantity of unreimbursed care that delayed the recipient's receipt of those services;

 (C) Payment of the Department's claim would cause an heir of the deceased recipient to become eligible for public assistance;

 (D) Waiver of the Department's claim would allow an heir to discontinue eligibility for public assistance for a substantial time period; or

 (E) Other situations that the Department, in its discretion and on a case-by-case basis upon consideration of all facts and circumstances, determines constitutes an undue hardship.

 004.04 LIMITATION. An undue hardship does not exist if action taken by the recipient, whether directly or by another person pursuant to sufficient authorization, impermissibly divested or diverted assets to avoid estate recovery.

 004.05 APPLICATION AND REVIEW PROCESS. An undue-hardship waiver application must be submitted in writing to the Department within 30 days of the creditor's claim-filing deadline or 90 days from the recipient's date of death if there is no probate proceeding. The application must explain: (A) How the applicant is related to the now-deceased Medicaid recipient, and include documents or other evidence of this relationship; and

 (B) The specific reason(s) why the application should be granted, according to 471 Nebraska Administrative Code (NAC) 38-004.03, and include documents or other evidence to support the application. The applicant will receive a written decision within 90 days after the Department has received the application. If the application is completely or partially denied, the decision will include general information about appealing the decision.

 Notes

 471 Neb. Admin. Code, ch. 38 , § 004 

 Adopted effective 7/1/2019 

 State regulations are updated quarterly; we currently have two versions available.
 Below is a comparison between our most recent version and the prior quarterly release. 
 More comparison features will be added as we have more versions to compare.

 No prior version found.

 State Regulations Toolbox

 Accessibility 

 About LII 

 Contact us 

 Advertise here 

 Help 

 Terms of use 

 Privacy
