Source URL: https://revenue.nebraska.gov/sites/default/files/doc/info/legislation/2012/LB536.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-09-23

LB 536                                                                   LB 536

                            LEGISLATIVE       BILL    536

                 Approved   by   the   Governor      April   5,   2012

Introduced by Wightman, 36; Ashford, 20.

FOR AN ACT relating to real property; to amend sections 30-2352, 30-2354,
          76-201, 76-202, 76-203, 76-214, 76-215, 76-238, 76-246, 76-277, and
          76-902, Reissue Revised Statutes of Nebraska; to adopt the Nebraska
          Uniform Real Property Transfer on Death Act; to provide exemptions
          from the documentary stamp tax; to harmonize provisions; to provide
          an operative date; and to repeal the original sections.
Be it enacted by the people of the State of Nebraska,

          Section 1. Sections 1 to 23 of this act shall be known and may be
cited as the Nebraska Uniform Real Property Transfer on Death Act.
          Sec. 2. For purposes of the Nebraska Uniform Real Property Transfer
on Death Act:
          (1) Beneficiary means a person that receives property under a
transfer on death deed;
          (2) Designated beneficiary means a person designated to receive
property in a transfer on death deed;
          (3) Joint owner means an individual who owns property concurrently
with one or more other individuals with a right of survivorship. The term
includes a joint tenant. The term does not include a tenant in common without
a right of survivorship;
          (4) Person means an individual, a corporation, an estate, a trustee
of a trust, a partnership, a limited liability company, an association, a
joint venture, a public corporation, a government or governmental subdivision,
agency, or instrumentality, or any other legal or commercial entity;
          (5) Property means an interest in real property located in this
state which is transferable on the death of the owner;
          (6) Transfer on death deed means a deed authorized under the
Nebraska Uniform Real Property Transfer on Death Act; and
          (7) Transferor means an individual who makes a transfer on death
deed.
          Sec. 3. The Nebraska Uniform Real Property Transfer on Death Act
applies to a transfer on death deed made before, on, or after the operative
date of this act by a transferor dying on or after the operative date of
this act. A transfer on death deed is subject to the common-law principles
of equity except to the extent modified by the Nebraska Uniform Real Property
Transfer on Death Act.
          Sec. 4. The Nebraska Uniform Real Property Transfer on Death Act
does not affect any method of transferring property otherwise permitted under
the law of this state.
          Sec. 5. An individual may transfer property to one or more
beneficiaries effective at the transferor’s death by a transfer on death
deed. If the property is agricultural land, the transferor may designate in
the transfer on death deed the disposition of the transferor’s interest in
growing crops to the transferor’s estate or to one or more of the designated
beneficiaries. If the property is agricultural land and the transfer on death
deed does not contain a designation of the disposition of the transferor’s
interest in growing crops, the transferor’s interest in the growing crops
shall pass to the transferor’s estate.
          Sec. 6. A transfer on death deed is revocable even if the deed or
another instrument contains a contrary provision.
          Sec. 7. A transfer on death deed is nontestamentary.
          Sec. 8. The capacity required to make or revoke a transfer on death
deed is the same as the capacity required to make a will.
          Sec. 9. A transfer on death deed shall be signed by the transferor
or by some person in his or her presence and by his or her direction
and shall be attested in writing by two or more disinterested witnesses,
whose signatures along with the transferor’s signature shall be made before
an officer authorized to administer oaths under the laws of this state or
under the laws of the state where execution occurs and evidenced by the
officer’s certificate, under official seal, in form and content substantially
as follows:
          I, .......... the transferor, sign my name to this instrument this
..... day of ..... 20 ....., and being first duly sworn, do hereby declare
to the undersigned authority that I sign and execute this transfer on death
deed to transfer my interest in the described real property and that I sign it
willingly or willingly direct another to sign for me, that I execute it as my



                                        -1-
LB 536                                                                  LB 536

free and voluntary act for the purposes therein expressed, that I am eighteen
years of age or older or am not at this time a minor, and that I am of sound
mind and under no constraint or undue influence.
          Transferor ..............
          We, ...... and ......, the witnesses, sign our names to this
instrument, being first duly sworn, and do hereby declare to the undersigned
authority that the transferor signs and executes this transfer on death deed
to transfer his or her interest in the described real property and that he or
she signs it willingly or willingly directs another to sign for him or her,
and that he or she executes it as his or her free and voluntary act for the
purposes therein expressed, and that each of us, in the presence and hearing
of the transferor, hereby signs this deed as witness to the transferor’s
signing, and that to the best of his or her knowledge the transferor is
eighteen years of age or older or is not at this time a minor and the
transferor is of sound mind and under no constraint or undue influence.
          Witness ..........
          Witness ..........
          THE STATE OF ....................
          COUNTY OF ....................
          Subscribed, sworn to, and acknowledged before me by ..........,
the transferor, and subscribed and sworn to before me by .......... and
..........., witnesses, this ..... day of ..... 20..... .
          (SEAL)(Signed) ....................
          (Official capacity of officer) ....................
          Sec. 10. (a) A transfer on death deed:
          (1) Except as otherwise provided in subdivision (2) of this
subsection, must contain the essential elements and formalities of a properly
recordable inter vivos deed;
          (2) Must state that the transfer to the designated beneficiary is to
occur at the transferor’s death;
          (3) Must contain the warnings provided in subsection (b) of this
section; and
          (4) Must be recorded (i) within thirty days after being executed as
required in section 9 of this act, (ii) before the transferor’s death, and
(iii) in the public records in the office of the register of deeds of the
county where the property is located.
          (b)(1) A transfer on death deed shall contain the following
warnings:
          WARNING: The property transferred remains subject to inheritance
taxation in Nebraska to the same extent as if owned by the transferor at
death. Failure to timely pay inheritance taxes is subject to interest and
penalties as provided by law.
          WARNING: The designated beneficiary is personally liable, to the
extent of the value of the property transferred, to account for medicaid
reimbursement to the extent necessary to discharge any such claim remaining
after application of the assets of the transferor’s estate. The designated
beneficiary may also be personally liable, to the extent of the value of
the property transferred, for claims against the estate, statutory allowances
to the transferor’s surviving spouse and children, and the expenses of
administration to the extent needed to pay such amounts by the personal
representative.
          WARNING: The Department of Health and Human Services may require
revocation of this deed by a transferor, a transferor’s spouse, or both a
transferor and the transferor’s spouse in order to qualify or remain qualified
for medicaid assistance.
          (2) No recorded transfer on death deed shall be invalidated because
of any defects in the wording of the warnings required by this subsection.
          Sec. 11. A transfer on death deed is effective without:
          (1) Notice or delivery to or acceptance by the designated
beneficiary during the transferor’s life; or
          (2) Consideration.
          Sec. 12. A completed statement as provided in subdivision (2)(a) of
section 76-214 must be filed at the time that the conveyance of real estate
transferred by a transfer on death deed becomes effective due to the death of
the transferor or the death of a surviving joint tenant of the transferor.
          Sec. 13. (a) Subject to subsection (b) of this section, an
instrument is effective to revoke a recorded transfer on death deed, or
any part of it, only if the instrument:
          (1) Is one of the following:
          (A) A transfer on death deed that revokes the deed or part of the
deed expressly or by inconsistency;
          (B) An instrument of revocation that expressly revokes the deed or



                                     -2-
LB 536                                                                  LB 536

part of the deed and that is executed with the same formalities as required in
section 9 of this act; or
          (C) An inter vivos deed that expressly or by inconsistency revokes
the transfer on death deed or part of the deed; and
          (2) Is acknowledged by the transferor after the acknowledgment of
the deed being revoked and is recorded (i) within thirty days after being
executed, (ii) before the transferor’s death, and (iii) in the public records
in the office of the register of deeds of the county where the deed is
recorded.
          (b) If a transfer on death deed is made by more than one transferor:
          (1) Revocation by a transferor does not affect the deed as to the
interest of another transferor; and
          (2) A deed of joint owners is revoked only if it is revoked by all
of the living joint owners who were transferors.
          (c) After a transfer on death deed is recorded, it may not be
revoked by a revocatory act on the deed.
          (d) This section does not limit the effect of an inter vivos
transfer of the property.
          Sec. 14. During a transferor’s life, a transfer on death deed does
not:
          (1) Affect an interest or right of the transferor or any other
owner, including the right to transfer or encumber the property;
          (2) Affect an interest or right of a transferee, even if the
transferee has actual or constructive notice of the deed;
          (3) Affect an interest or right of a secured or unsecured creditor
or future creditor of the transferor, even if the creditor has actual or
constructive notice of the deed;
          (4) Affect the transferor’s or designated beneficiary’s eligibility
for any form of public assistance except to the extent provided in section 21
of this act;
          (5) Create a legal or equitable interest in favor of the designated
beneficiary; or
          (6) Subject the property to claims or process of a creditor of the
designated beneficiary.
          Sec. 15. (a) Except as otherwise provided in the transfer on death
deed, in this section, or in sections 30-2313 to 30-2319 or section 30-2354,
on the death of the transferor, the following rules apply to property that is
the subject of a transfer on death deed and owned by the transferor at death:
          (1) Subject to subdivision (2) of this subsection, the interest in
the property is transferred to the designated beneficiary in accordance with
the deed;
          (2) The interest of a designated beneficiary is contingent on the
designated beneficiary surviving the transferor by one hundred twenty hours.
If the deed provides for a different survival period, the deed shall determine
the survival requirement for designated beneficiaries. The interest of a
designated beneficiary that fails to survive the transferor by one hundred
twenty hours or as otherwise provided in the deed shall be treated as if the
designated beneficiary predeceased the transferor;
          (3) Subject to subdivision (4) of this subsection, concurrent
interests are transferred to the beneficiaries in equal and undivided shares
with no right of survivorship; and
          (4) If the transferor has identified two or more designated
beneficiaries to receive concurrent interests in the property, the share
of one which fails for any reason is transferred to the other, or to the
others in proportion to the interest of each in the remaining part of the
property held concurrently.
          (b) A beneficiary takes the property subject to all conveyances,
encumbrances, assignments, contracts, mortgages, liens, and other interests to
which the property is subject at the transferor’s death.
          (c) If a transferor is a joint owner and is:
          (1) Survived by one or more other joint owners, the property that is
the subject of a transfer on death deed belongs to the surviving joint owner
or owners with right of survivorship; or
          (2) The last surviving joint owner, the transfer on death deed of
the last surviving joint owner transferor is effective.
          (d) A transfer on death deed transfers property without covenant or
warranty of title even if the deed contains a contrary provision.
          (e) If after recording a transfer on death deed the transferor
is divorced or his or her marriage is dissolved or annulled, the divorce,
dissolution, or annulment revokes any disposition or appointment of property
made by the transfer on death deed to the former spouse unless the transfer on
death deed expressly provides otherwise. Property prevented from passing to a



                                     -3-
LB 536                                                                  LB 536

former spouse under a transfer on death deed because of revocation by divorce,
dissolution, or annulment passes as if the former spouse failed to survive
the transferor. A decree of separation which does not terminate the status of
husband and wife is not a divorce for purposes of this section.
          Sec. 16. A beneficiary may disclaim all or part of the beneficiary’s
interest as provided by section 30-2352.
          Sec. 17. (a) If other assets of the estate of the transferor are
insufficient to pay all claims against the transferor’s estate, statutory
allowances to the transferor’s surviving spouse and children, and the expenses
of administration, a transfer under the Nebraska Uniform Real Property
Transfer on Death Act subjects the beneficiary to personal liability as
provided in this section to the extent needed to pay all claims against the
transferor’s estate, statutory allowances to the transferor’s surviving spouse
and children, and the expenses of administration.
          (b)(1) A beneficiary who receives property through a transfer on
death deed upon the death of the transferor is liable to account to the
personal representative of the transferor’s estate for a proportionate share
of the fair market value of the equity in the interest received to the extent
necessary to discharge the claims and allowances described in subsection
(a) of this section remaining unpaid after application of the transferor’s
estate. For purposes of this subdivision (b)(1), the fair market value shall
be determined as of the date of death of the transferor. For purposes
of this subdivision (b)(1), the beneficiary’s proportionate share means the
proportionate share of all nonprobate transfers recovered by the personal
representative for the payment of the claims and allowances under the Nebraska
Uniform Real Property Transfer on Death Act and sections 30-2726, 30-2743, and
30-3850.
          (2) A proceeding to assert the liability for claims against the
estate and statutory allowances may not be commenced unless the personal
representative has received a written demand by the surviving spouse, a
creditor, a child, or a person acting for a child of the transferor.
The proceeding must be commenced within one year after the death of the
transferor.
          (c) A beneficiary against whom a proceeding to account is brought
may join as a party to the proceeding a surviving party or beneficiary of any
other transfer on death deed for the same transferor or any other asset of the
transferor subject to sections 30-2726, 30-2743, and 30-3850.
          (d) Assets recovered by the personal representative pursuant to this
section shall be administered as part of the transferor’s estate.
          (e) Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the rights
of creditors under other laws of this state.
          Sec. 18. A beneficiary to whom an interest is transferred by a
transfer on death deed shall be personally liable to account for medicaid
reimbursement pursuant to section 68-919 and section 17 of this act to
the extent necessary to discharge any such claim remaining unpaid after
application of the assets of the transferor’s estate. Such liability shall be
limited to the value of the interest transferred to the beneficiary. The right
to recover applies to medical assistance provided before, at the same time as,
or after the signing of and the recording of the transfer on death deed.
          Sec. 19. A contract to make a transfer on death deed, or not
to revoke a transfer on death deed, can be established only by a writing
evidencing the contract signed by the transferor after the operative date of
this act.
          Sec. 20. (a) Except as otherwise provided in subsection (b) of this
section, if property or any interest therein transferred to a beneficiary by
a transfer on death deed is acquired by a purchaser or lender for value from
a beneficiary of a transfer on death deed, the purchaser or lender takes
title free of any claims of the estate, personal representative, surviving
spouse, creditors, and any other person claiming by or through the transferor
of the transfer on death deed and the purchaser or lender shall not incur any
personal liability to the estate, personal representative, surviving spouse,
creditors, or any other person claiming by or through the transferor of the
transfer on death deed, whether or not the conveyance by the transfer on
death deed was proper. Except as otherwise provided in subsection (b) of this
section, to be protected under this section, a purchaser or lender need not
inquire whether a transferor or beneficiary of the transfer on death deed
acted properly in making the conveyance to the beneficiary by the transfer on
death deed.
          (b) A purchaser or lender for value from a beneficiary of a transfer
on death deed does not take title free of any lien for inheritance tax under
section 77-2003.
          Sec. 21. The Department of Health and Human Services may require



                                     -4-
LB 536                                                                  LB 536

revocation of a transfer on death deed by a transferor, a transferor’s spouse,
or both a transferor and the transferor’s spouse in order for the transferor
to qualify or remain qualified for medicaid assistance.
          Sec. 22. In applying and construing the Nebraska Uniform Real
Property Transfer on Death Act, consideration must be given to the need to
promote uniformity of the law with respect to its subject matter among the
states that enact it.
          Sec. 23. The Nebraska Uniform Real Property Transfer on Death Act
modifies, limits, and supersedes the federal Electronic Signatures in Global
and National Commerce Act, 15 U.S.C. 7001 et seq., but does not modify, limit,
or supersede section 101(c) of that act, 15 U.S.C. 7001(c), or authorize
electronic delivery of any of the notices described in section 103(b) of that
act, 15 U.S.C. 7003(b).
          Sec. 24. Section 30-2352, Reissue Revised Statutes of Nebraska, is
amended to read:
          30-2352 (a)(1) A person (or the representative of a deceased,
incapacitated, or protected person) who is an heir, devisee, person
succeeding to a renounced interest, donee, beneficiary under a testamentary
or nontestamentary instrument, donee of a power of appointment, grantee,
surviving joint owner or surviving joint tenant, beneficiary, or owner of
an insurance contract or any incident of ownership therein, beneficiary or
person designated to take pursuant to a power of appointment exercised by
a testamentary or nontestamentary instrument, person who has a statutory
entitlement to or election with respect to property pursuant to the Nebraska
Probate Code, designated beneficiary of a transfer on death deed, or
recipient of any beneficial interest under any testamentary or nontestamentary
instrument, may renounce in whole or in part, or with reference to specific
parts, fractional shares, undivided portions or assets thereof, by filing
a written instrument of renunciation within the time and at the place
hereinafter provided.
          (2) The instrument shall (i) describe the property or part thereof
or the interest therein renounced, (ii) be signed and acknowledged by the
person renouncing in the manner provided for in the execution of deeds of
real estate, (iii) declare the renunciation and the extent thereof, and (iv)
declare that the renunciation is an irrevocable and unqualified refusal to
accept the renounced interest.
          (3) The appropriate court in a proceeding under section 30-3812, may
direct or permit a trustee under a testamentary or nontestamentary instrument
to renounce any restriction on or power of administration, management, or
allocation of benefit upon finding that such restrictions on the exercise
of such power may defeat or impair the accomplishment of the purposes of
the trust whether by the imposition of tax or the allocation of beneficial
interest inconsistent with such purposes or by other reason. Such authority
shall be exercised after hearing and upon notice to qualified beneficiaries as
defined in section 30-3803, in the manner directed by the court.
          (b) The instrument specified in (a)(1) and (a)(2) must be received
by the transferor of the interest, his or her legal representative, the
personal representative of a deceased transferor, the trustee of any trust in
which the interest being renounced exists, or the holder of the legal title to
the property to which the interest relates. To be effective for purposes of
determining inheritance and estate taxes under articles 20 and 21 of Chapter
77, the instrument must be received not later than the date which is nine
months after the later of (i) the date on which the transfer creating the
interest in such person is made, or (ii) the date on which such person attains
age twenty-one. If the circumstances which establish the right of a person
to renounce an interest arise as a result of the death of an individual, the
instrument shall also be filed in the court of the county where proceedings
concerning the decedent’s estate are pending, or where they would be pending
if commenced. If an interest in real estate is renounced, a copy of the
instrument shall also be recorded in the office of the register of deeds in
the county in which the real estate lies. No person entitled to a copy of
the instrument shall be liable for any proper distribution or disposition made
without actual notice of the renunciation and no such person making a proper
distribution or disposition in reliance upon the renunciation shall be liable
for any such distribution or disposition in the absence of actual notice that
an action has been instituted contesting the validity of the renunciation.
          (c) Unless the transferor of the interest has otherwise indicated in
the instrument creating the interest, the interest renounced, and any future
interest which is to take effect in possession or enjoyment at or after the
termination of the interest renounced, passes as if the person renouncing had
predeceased the decedent or had died prior to the date on which the transfer
creating the interest in such person is made, as the case may be, if the



                                     -5-
LB 536                                                                  LB 536

renunciation is within the time periods set forth in subsection (b) and if
not within such time periods the interest renounced, and any future interest
which is to take effect in possession or enjoyment at or after the termination
of the interest renounced, passes as if the person renouncing had died on
the date the interest was renounced. The person renouncing shall have no
power to direct how the interest being renounced shall pass, except that the
renunciation of an interest for which the right to renounce was established by
the death of an individual shall, in the case of the spouse of the decedent,
relate only to that statutory provision or that provision of the instrument
creating the interest being renounced and shall not preclude the spouse
from receiving the benefits of the renounced interest which may be derived
as a result of the renounced interest passing pursuant to other statutory
provisions or pursuant to other provisions of the instrument creating the
interest unless such further benefits are also renounced. In every case when
the renunciation is within the time periods set forth in subsection (b)
the renunciation relates back for all purposes to the date of death of the
decedent or the date on which the transfer creating the interest in such
person is made, as the case may be.
          (d) Any (1) assignment, conveyance, encumbrance, pledge, or transfer
of property therein or any contract therefor, (2) written waiver of the right
to renounce or any acceptance of property or benefits therefrom or an interest
therein by an heir, devisee, person succeeding to a renounced interest,
donee, beneficiary under a testamentary or nontestamentary instrument, donee
of a power of appointment, grantee, surviving joint owner or surviving
joint tenant, beneficiary or owner of an insurance contract or any incident
of ownership therein, beneficiary or person designated to take pursuant
to a power of appointment exercised by a testamentary or nontestamentary
instrument, person who has a statutory entitlement to or election with respect
to property pursuant to the Nebraska Probate Code, or recipient of any
beneficial interest under any testamentary or nontestamentary instrument, or
(3) sale or other disposition of property pursuant to judicial process, made
within the time periods set forth in subsection (b) shall not bar the right
to renounce, but shall make a subsequent renunciation within the time period
set forth in subsection (b) of this section ineffective for purposes of
determination of inheritance and estate taxes under articles 20 and 21 article
20 of Chapter 77. Any renunciation made after any part of the property has
been assigned, conveyed, encumbered, pledged, or transferred is ineffective
for the portion of the property which has previously been assigned, conveyed,
encumbered, pledged, or transferred.
          (e) Within thirty days of receipt of a written instrument
of renunciation by the transferor of the interest, his or her legal
representative, the personal representative of the decedent, the trustee of
any trust in which the interest being renounced exists, or the holder of the
legal title to the property to which the interest relates, as the case may
be, such person shall attempt to notify in writing those persons who are
known or ascertainable with reasonable diligence who shall be recipients or
potential recipients of the renounced interest of the renunciation and the
interest or potential interest such recipient shall receive as a result of
the renunciation.
          (f) The right to renounce granted by this section exists
irrespective of any limitation on the interest of the person renouncing in the
nature of a spendthrift provision or similar restriction. A trust beneficiary
whose interest is subject to any limitation in the nature of a spendthrift
provision or similar restriction may assign, sell, or otherwise convey such
interest or any part thereof upon a finding by a court in a proceeding under
section 30-3812 that the rights of other beneficiaries would not be impaired
and that such assignment, sale, or other conveyance would not result in any
substantial benefit to nonbeneficiaries of the trust at the expense of the
trust or trust beneficiaries. Such finding may be made after hearing and upon
notice to all known persons beneficially interested in such trust, in the
manner directed by the court.
          (g) This section does not abridge the right of any person to assign,
convey, release, or renounce any property arising under any other section of
this code or other statute.
          (h) Any interest in property which exists on July 19, 1980, may
be renounced after July 19, 1980, as provided herein. An interest which has
arisen prior to July 19, 1980, in any person other than the person renouncing
is not destroyed or diminished by any action of the person renouncing taken
under this section.
          Sec. 25. Section 30-2354, Reissue Revised Statutes of Nebraska, is
amended to read:
          30-2354 (a) A surviving spouse, heir or devisee who feloniously and



                                     -6-
LB 536                                                                  LB 536

intentionally kills or aids and abets the killing of the decedent is not
entitled to any benefits under the will or under this article, and the estate
of the decedent passes as if such spouse, heir, or devisee had predeceased the
decedent. Property appointed by the will of the decedent to or for the benefit
of such devisee passes as if the devisee had predeceased the decedent.
          (b) Any joint tenant who feloniously and intentionally kills or aids
and abets the killing of another joint tenant thereby effects a severance
of the interest of the decedent so that the share of the decedent passes
as his property and such joint tenant has no rights by survivorship. This
provision applies to joint tenancies and tenancies by the entirety in real
and personal property, joint accounts in banks, savings and loan associations,
credit unions and other institutions, and any other form of co-ownership with
survivorship incidents.
          (c) A named beneficiary of a bond, life insurance policy, or other
contractual arrangement who feloniously and intentionally kills or aids and
abets the killing of the principal obligee or the individual upon whose
life the policy is issued is not entitled to any benefit under the bond,
policy or other contractual arrangement, and it becomes payable as though such
beneficiary has predeceased the decedent.
          (d) Real property specified for a designated beneficiary of a
transfer on death deed who feloniously and intentionally kills or aids and
abets the killing of the transferor who signed the transfer on death deed
or any other owner of the real property shall pass as if the designated
beneficiary had predeceased the transferor.
          (d) (e) Any other acquisition of property or interest by the killer
or by one who aids and abets the killer is treated in accordance with the
principles of this section.
          (e) (f) A final judgment of conviction of felonious and intentional
killing or aiding and abetting therein is conclusive for purposes of this
section. In the absence of a conviction of felonious and intentional killing
or aiding and abetting therein, the court may determine by a preponderance of
evidence whether the killing or aiding and abetting therein was felonious and
intentional for purposes of this section.
          (f) (g) This section does not affect the rights of any person who,
before rights under this section have been adjudicated, purchases, from the
killer or aider and abettor for value and without notice, property which the
killer or aider and abettor would have acquired except for this section, but
the killer or aider and abettor is liable for the amount of the proceeds
or the value of the property. Any insurance company, bank, or other obligor
making payment according to the terms of its policy or obligation is not
liable by reason of this section unless prior to payment it has received at
its home office or principal address written notice of a claim under this
section.
          Sec. 26. Section 76-201, Reissue Revised Statutes of Nebraska, is
amended to read:
          76-201 The term real estate, as used in For purposes of sections
76-201 to 76-281 and section 31 of this act, the term real estate shall be
construed as coextensive in meaning with lands, tenements, and hereditaments,
and as embracing all chattels real, except leases for a term not exceeding one
year.
          Sec. 27. Section 76-202, Reissue Revised Statutes of Nebraska, is
amended to read:
          76-202 The term purchaser, as used in sections 76-201 to 76-281 and
section 31 of this act, shall be construed to embrace every person to whom any
real estate or interest therein shall be conveyed for valuable consideration,
and also any assignee of mortgage or lease, or other conditional estate.
          Sec. 28. Section 76-203, Reissue Revised Statutes of Nebraska, is
amended to read:
          76-203 The term deed, as used in sections 76-201 to 76-281 and
section 31 of this act, shall be construed to embrace every instrument in
writing by which any real estate or interest therein is created, aliened,
mortgaged, or assigned, or by which the title to any real estate may be
affected in law or equity, except last wills and leases for one year or for
a less time.
          Sec. 29. Section 76-214, Reissue Revised Statutes of Nebraska, is
amended to read:
          76-214 (1) Every grantee who has a deed to real estate recorded
and every purchaser of real estate who has a memorandum of contract or
land contract recorded shall, at the time such deed, memorandum of contract,
or land contract is presented for recording, file with the register of
deeds a completed statement as prescribed by the Tax Commissioner. For all
deeds and all memoranda of contract and land contracts recorded on and



                                     -7-
LB 536                                                                  LB 536

after January 1, 2001, the statement shall not require the social security
number of the grantee or purchaser or the federal employer identification
number of the grantee or purchaser. This statement may require the recitation
of any information contained in the deed, memorandum of contract, or land
contract, the total consideration paid, the amount of the total consideration
attributable to factors other than the purchase of the real estate itself,
and other factors which may influence the transaction. If a death certificate
is recorded as provided in subsection (2) of this section, this statement may
require a date of death, the name of the decedent, and whether the title
is affected as a result of a transfer on death deed, a joint tenancy deed,
or the expiration of a life estate or by any other means. This statement
shall be signed and filed by the grantee, the purchaser, or his or her
authorized agent. The register of deeds shall forward the statement to the
county assessor. If the grantee or purchaser fails to furnish the prescribed
statement, the register of deeds shall not record the deed, memorandum of
contract, or land contract. The register of deeds shall indicate on the
statement the book and page or computer system reference where the deed,
memorandum of contract, or land contract is recorded and shall immediately
forward the statement to the county assessor. The county assessor shall
process the statement according to the instructions of the Property Tax
Administrator and shall, pursuant to the rules and regulations of the Tax
Commissioner, forward the statement to the Tax Commissioner.
          (2)(a) The statement described in subsection (1) of this section
shall be filed at the time that a certified or authenticated copy of the
grantor’s death certificate is filed if such death certificate is required to
be filed under section 31 of this act.
          (b) The statement described in subsection (1) of this section shall
not be required to be filed at the time that a transfer on death deed is filed
or at the time that an instrument of revocation of a transfer on death deed as
described in subdivision (a)(1)(B) of section 13 of this act is filed.
          (2) (3) Any person shall have access to the statements at the
office of the Tax Commissioner, county assessor, or register of deeds if
the statements are available and have not been disposed of pursuant to the
records retention and disposition schedule as approved by the State Records
Administrator.
          Sec. 30. Section 76-215, Reissue Revised Statutes of Nebraska, is
amended to read:
          76-215 Any person who fails to obey the provisions of subsection (1)
of section 76-214 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction
thereof shall be fined in any sum not less than ten dollars nor exceeding five
hundred dollars.
          Sec. 31. If a conveyance of real estate was pursuant to (1) a
transfer on death deed due to the death of the transferor or the death of a
surviving joint tenant of the transferor, (2) a joint tenancy deed due to the
death of a joint tenant, or (3) the expiration of a life estate, then a death
certificate shall be filed with the register of deeds to document the transfer
of title to the beneficiary of the transfer on death deed, to the surviving
joint tenant or joint tenants, or to the holder of an interest in real estate
which receives that interest as a result of the death of a life tenant.
          Sec. 32. Section 76-238, Reissue Revised Statutes of Nebraska, is
amended to read:
          76-238 (1) All Except as otherwise provided in sections 13, 14, and
15 of this act, all deeds, mortgages, and other instruments of writing which
are required to be or which under the laws of this state may be recorded,
shall take effect and be in force from and after the time of delivering such
instruments to the register of deeds for recording, and not before, as to all
creditors and subsequent purchasers in good faith without notice. All such
instruments are void as to all creditors and subsequent purchasers without
notice whose deeds, mortgages, or other instruments are recorded prior to such
instruments. However, such instruments are valid between the parties to the
instrument.
          (2) For purposes of this section, possession of agricultural real
estate or residential real estate by a party related to the owner of record
of the real estate within the third degree of consanguinity or affinity shall
not serve as notice to a creditor or subsequent purchaser in any case in which
such party is claiming rights in such real estate pursuant to a lease (a)
entered into on or after July 16, 2004; (b) purporting to extend beyond a
term of one year; and (c) which has not satisfied the requirements of section
76-211, unless the creditor or subsequent purchaser, in advance of recording
a deed, mortgage, or other instrument, has received a written copy of such
lease.
          (3) For purposes of this section:



                                     -8-
LB 536                                                                  LB 536

          (a) Agricultural products includes grain and feed crops; forages and
sod crops; and animal production, including breeding, feeding, or grazing of
cattle, horses, swine, sheep, goats, bees, or poultry;
          (b) Agricultural real estate means land which is primarily used for
the production of agricultural products, including waste land lying in or
adjacent to and in common ownership with land used for the production of
agricultural products;
          (c) Related within the third degree of consanguinity or affinity
includes parents, grandparents, great-grandparents, children, grandchildren,
great-grandchildren, brothers, sisters, uncles, aunts, nephews, nieces, and
spouses of the same and any partnership, limited liability company, or
corporation in which all of the partners, members, or shareholders are related
within the third degree of consanguinity or affinity; and
          (d) Residential real estate means real estate containing not more
than four units designed for use for residential purposes. A condominium
unit that is otherwise residential real estate remains so even though the
condominium development contains more than four dwelling units or units for
nonresidential purposes.
          Sec. 33. Section 76-246, Reissue Revised Statutes of Nebraska, is
amended to read:
          76-246 No instrument containing a power to convey, or in any manner
to affect real estate, executed, acknowledged or proved, and certified and
recorded in conformity with the requirements of sections 76-211 to 76-245
and section 31 of this act, can be revoked by any act of the party or
parties thereto until the instrument of revocation is executed, acknowledged
or proved, and certified and filed for record with the register of deeds of
the county in which the power is recorded.
          Sec. 34. Section 76-277, Reissue Revised Statutes of Nebraska, is
amended to read:
          76-277 The provisions of sections Sections 76-201 to 76-281 shall
and section 31 of this act apply to the conveyance of all claims and
improvements upon the public lands.
          Sec. 35. Section 76-902, Reissue Revised Statutes of Nebraska, is
amended to read:
          76-902 The tax imposed by section 76-901 shall not apply to:
          (1) Deeds recorded prior to November 18, 1965;
          (2) Deeds to property transferred by or to the United States
of America, the State of Nebraska, or any of their agencies or political
subdivisions;
          (3) Deeds which secure or release a debt or other obligation;
          (4) Deeds which, without additional consideration, confirm, correct,
modify, or supplement a deed previously recorded but which do not extend or
limit existing title or interest;
          (5)(a) Deeds between husband and wife, or spouses, between
ex-spouses for the purpose of conveying any rights to property acquired
or held during the marriage, or between parent and child, without actual
consideration therefor, and (b) deeds to or from a family corporation,
partnership, or limited liability company when all the shares of stock of
the corporation or interest in the partnership or limited liability company
are owned by members of a family, or a trust created for the benefit of
a member of that family, related to one another within the fourth degree
of kindred according to the rules of civil law, and their spouses, for no
consideration other than the issuance of stock of the corporation or interest
in the partnership or limited liability company to such family members or the
return of the stock to the corporation in partial or complete liquidation of
the corporation or deeds in dissolution of the interest in the partnership or
limited liability company. In order to qualify for the exemption for family
corporations, partnerships, or limited liability companies, the property shall
be transferred in the name of the corporation or partnership and not in the
name of the individual shareholders, partners, or members;
          (6) Tax deeds;
          (7) Deeds of partition;
          (8) Deeds made pursuant to mergers, consolidations, sales, or
transfers of the assets of corporations pursuant to plans of merger or
consolidation filed with the office of Secretary of State. A copy of such plan
filed with the Secretary of State shall be presented to the register of deeds
before such exemption is granted;
          (9) Deeds made by a subsidiary corporation to its parent corporation
for no consideration other than the cancellation or surrender of the
subsidiary’s stock;
          (10) Cemetery deeds;
          (11) Mineral deeds;



                                     -9-
LB 536                                                                  LB 536

          (12) Deeds executed pursuant to court decrees;
          (13) Land contracts;
          (14) Deeds which release a reversionary interest, a condition
subsequent or precedent, a restriction, or any other contingent interest;
          (15) Deeds of distribution executed by a personal representative
conveying to devisees or heirs property passing by testate or intestate
succession;
          (16) Transfer on death deeds or revocations of transfer on death
deeds;
          (17) Certified or authenticated death certificates pertaining to
transfer on death deeds;
          (16) (18) Deeds transferring property located within the boundaries
of an Indian reservation if the grantor or grantee is a reservation Indian;
          (17) (19) Deeds transferring property into a trust if the transfer
of the same property would be exempt if the transfer was made directly from
the grantor to the beneficiary or beneficiaries under the trust. No such
exemption shall be granted unless the register of deeds is presented with a
signed statement certifying that the transfer of the property is made under
such circumstances as to come within one of the exemptions specified in this
section and that evidence supporting the exemption is maintained by the person
signing the statement and is available for inspection by the Department of
Revenue;
          (18) (20) Deeds transferring property from a trustee to a
beneficiary of a trust;
          (19) (21) Deeds which convey property held in the name of any
partnership or limited liability company not subject to subdivision (5) of
this section to any partner in the partnership or member of the limited
liability company or to his or her spouse;
          (20) (22) Leases;
          (21) (23) Easements; or
          (22) (24) Deeds which transfer title from a trustee to a beneficiary
pursuant to a power of sale exercised by a trustee under a trust deed.
          Sec. 36. This act becomes operative on January 1, 2013.
          Sec. 37. Original sections 30-2352, 30-2354, 76-201, 76-202, 76-203,
76-214, 76-215, 76-238, 76-246, 76-277, and 76-902, Reissue Revised Statutes
of Nebraska, are repealed.




                                     -10-

