Source URL: https://www.law.cornell.edu/regulations/new-hampshire/N-H-Admin-Code-SS-He-W-895.04
Retrieved: 2026-09-23

N.H. Admin. Code § He-W 895.04 - Criteria for Determination of Undue Hardship | State Regulations | US Law | LII / Legal Information Institute 

 Please help us improve our site!

 × 

 No thank you 

 Skip to main content 

 Cornell Law
 School 
 Search
 Cornell 

 Toggle navigation 

 Please help
 us improve our site! 

 Support Us! 

 Search 

 About
 LII 

 Who We Are 

 What We Do 

 Who Pays For This 

 Contact Us 

 Get the
 law 

 Constitution 

 Supreme Court 

 U.S. Code 

 CFR 

 Federal Rules 

 Federal Rules of Appellate Procedure 

 Federal Rules of Civil Procedure 

 Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure 

 Federal Rules of Evidence 

 Federal Rules of Bankruptcy Procedure 

 U.C.C. 

 Law by jurisdiction 

 State law 

 Uniform laws 

 Federal law 

 World law 

 Lawyer directory 

 Legal encyclopedia 

 Business law 

 Constitutional law 

 Criminal law 

 Family law 

 Employment law 

 Money and Finances 

 More... 

 Help out 

 Give 

 Sponsor 

 Advertise 

 Create 

 Promote 

 Join Lawyer Directory 

 LII 

 State Regulations 

 New Hampshire Administrative Code 

 He - Department of Health and Human Services 

 He-W - Former Division of Human Services 

 Chapter He-W 800 - ELIGIBILITY FOR MEDICAL ASSISTANCE 

 N.H. Admin. Code He, He-W, ch. He-W 800, pt. He-W 895 - UNDUE HARDSHIP 

 N.H. Admin. Code § He-W 895.04 - Criteria for Determination of Undue Hardship

 N.H. Admin. Code § He-W 895.04 - Criteria for Determination of Undue Hardship 

 State Regulations 

 Compare

 The department shall waive recovery on the basis of undue
 hardship as provided in (a), (b), (c), (d), (e) or (f) below:

 (a) Where the estate includes real property
 on which a business or farm is located and: 
 (1) The business or farm has been in
 operation at the primary residence of the heir for at least 12 months preceding
 the death of the decedent;

 (2) The
 business or farm produces more than 50% of the heir's livelihood; and

 (3) The recovery of the claim would directly
 result in the loss of the livelihood of the heir;

 (b) Where the estate includes
 income-producing property and: (1) The heir
 has used his/her own personal resources for the past 12 months to maintain the
 income-producing property;

 (2) The
 property produces more than 50% of the heir's livelihood; and

 (3) The recovery of the claim would directly
 result in the loss of the livelihood of the heir;

 (c) Where the estate includes only personal
 property and recovery by the department would directly result in the heir
 becoming eligible for public assistance;

 (d) Where the estate includes the home of the
 Medicaid recipient upon which the department placed a lien or upon which the
 department had authority to place a lien but didn't due to insufficient time,
 and: (1) The applicant is an adult child of
 the deceased Medicaid recipient;

 (2) The applicant is the grandchild of a
 deceased Medicaid recipient who died on or after January 1, 2008 and who can
 establish that the deceased Medicaid recipient had guardianship over the
 applicant while the applicant was a minor or that the deceased Medicaid
 recipient served as in-loco parentis to the applicant while he
 or she was a minor;

 (3) The
 applicant resided in the home of the deceased Medicaid recipient for a period
 of at least 2 years immediately before the date of the deceased Medicaid
 recipient's admission to the medical institution;

 (4) The applicant establishes that he or she
 provided uncompensated care daily to the deceased Medicaid recipient for at
 least 2 years immediately before the date of the deceased Medicaid recipient's
 admission to the medical institution which permitted the deceased Medicaid
 recipient to reside at home rather than in a medical institution, including but
 not limited to any or all of the following activities: 
 a. Bathing;

 b. Dressing;

 c. Administering medication;

 d. Shopping;

 e. Cooking;

 f. Feeding;

 g. House cleaning;

 h. Money management;

 i. Driving; or

 j. Other care specific to the condition of
 the deceased Medicaid recipient; and

 (5) The applicant is lawfully residing in the
 home of the deceased Medicaid recipient and has lawfully resided in such home
 on a continuous basis since the date of the deceased Medicaid recipient's
 admission to the medical institution;

 (e) Where the estate includes the home of the
 Medicaid recipient, and: (1) The applicant is
 a sibling of the deceased Medicaid recipient;

 (2) The applicant resided in the home of the
 deceased Medicaid recipient for a period of at least one year immediately
 before the date of the deceased Medicaid recipient's admission to the medical
 institution; and

 (3) The applicant
 is lawfully residing in the home of the deceased Medicaid recipient and has
 lawfully resided in such home on a continuous basis since the date of the
 deceased Medicaid recipient's admission to the medical institution;
 or

 (f) Where the estate
 includes the home of the Medicaid recipient which she or he held either in life
 estate or in joint tenancy, and: (1) The
 applicant can demonstrate that he or she is either the remainderman under the
 life estate or the surviving joint tenant; and

 (2) The applicant can demonstrate that he or
 she paid value for the remainder interest or joint interest either when the
 interest was created or to cure a transfer of asset penalty contemplated at
 He-W 820.01(s) (3) .

 Notes

 N.H. Admin.
 Code §
 He-W 895.04 

 Adopted by
 Volume
 XXXVI Number 36, Filed September 8, 2016 , Proposed by #11170,
 Effective 8/26/2016 ,
 Expires 8/26/2026 . 

 State regulations are updated quarterly; we currently have two versions available.
 Below is a comparison between our most recent version and the prior quarterly release. 
 More comparison features will be added as we have more versions to compare.

 No prior version found.

 State Regulations Toolbox

 Accessibility 

 About LII 

 Contact us 

 Advertise here 

 Help 

 Terms of use 

 Privacy
