Source URL: https://www.nj.gov/humanservices/dmahs/documents/individuals-families/The_NJ_Medicaid_Program_and_Estate_Recovery_What_You_Should_Know.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-09-23

              The New Jersey Medicaid Program and Estate Recovery
                            What You Should Know



What is Estate Recovery?

Under federal and New Jersey law, the Division of Medical Assistance and Health
Services (DMAHS) is required to recover funds from the estates of certain deceased
Medicaid beneficiaries, or former Medicaid beneficiaries, for all payments provided
through the Medicaid program for services received on or after age 55. This includes,
but is not limited to, capitation payments made to any managed care organization,
transportation broker, PACE provider, or any other capitated provider, regardless of
whether any services were received from an individual or entity that would have been
reimbursed by the managed care organization, transportation broker, PACE provider, or
other provider that is paid by capitation payments.

Why Estate Recovery?

DMAHS pursues recovery from estates to supplement funds available for medical
assistance programs and limit the burden upon taxpayers caused by rising medical
costs. Funds recovered help provide assistance to others in need.

Who is Affected?

The estates of beneficiaries or former beneficiaries who were 55 years of age or older at
the time they received services may be affected.

What is an Estate?

For Medicaid estate recovery purposes, an estate includes any property that belonged to
the deceased at the time of death or at the moment prior to their death. By law, estates
include property such as the decedent's home or share of a home, bank accounts
(whether solely or jointly held), trusts and annuities, stocks and bonds, and any other
real or personal property. It is important to understand that even though the deceased's
share of property may pass to survivor(s), it continues to be considered as part of the
estate for New Jersey Medicaid recovery purposes.

Will DMAHS seek recovery immediately upon death?

Yes, if the deceased has no surviving spouse, and has no surviving child under age 21,
and no surviving child who is blind or permanently and totally disabled according to
Social Security standards at 42 USC 1382c. The only time that recovery will not be
pursued is:    I
   1. If it would not be cost-effective to do so; or,
   2. If property in the estate is the sole source of income for one or more of the
                                         Page 1 of 3
       survivors and pursuit of recovery is likely to result in one or more of those
       survivors becoming eligible for public assistance and/or Medicaid benefits; or,
   3. If a family member of a deceased Medicaid beneficiary has, prior to the
      beneficiary's death, continuously resided in a home owned by the beneficiary at
      the time of the beneficiary's death, and that home was the client's primary
      residence, and was, and remains, the family member's primary residence,
      DMAHS may record a lien against the property, but will not enforce the lien until
      the property is voluntarily sold, or the resident family member either dies or
      vacates the property.

When will DMAHS not seek recovery immediately upon death?

DMAHS will not seek recovery if there is a surviving spouse or a surviving child who is
under the age of 21, or is blind or permanently and totally disabled according to Social
Security standards at 42 USC 1382c. In that case, repayment would be postponed until:
 1. The child reached the age of 21, or,
 2. The time of the spouse or child's death.
When any of these exceptions to DMAHS' right to recover from an estate no longer
apply (i.e., as a result of the death of a surviving spouse, attainment of age 21 by a
surviving child, and/or recovery from disability or death of a blind or permanently and
totally disabled child), DMAHS has a right to recover from any remaining estate assets
at that time.

What should I know about Medicaid liens? Will the Medicaid program file a
lien against my home and property?

A Medicaid lien is a claim placed against a deceased person's property to ensure that the
estate pays a debt.

When you apply for Medicaid, a lien is not filed against your property. A lien is placed on
property after the death of a Medicaid beneficiary or former beneficiary who received
services on or after age 55 if there is no surviving spouse, no surviving child under 21
years old, and no surviving child who is blind or totally and permanently disabled. The
amount claimed as a lien will be equal to the amount of all Medicaid assistance DMAHS
provided for services received on or after age 55, including any capitation payments
made to a Medicaid health plan or other entity on the beneficiary's behalf.

What about Life Insurance Policies?

Proceeds from life insurance policies are considered the assets of the named
beneficiaries. Proceeds from whole life policies are subject to estate recovery if they are
not liquidated prior to death as required. Proceeds from any policy are considered
recoverable when the proceeds are paid to the beneficiary's estate as the named
beneficiary or as a default beneficiary including when another named insurance
beneficiary predeceases (dies before or at the same time as) the Medicaid beneficiary.

What about Annuities?

Annuities, which are determined not to be subject to asset liquidation prior to eligibility,
must name the State of New Jersey as the remainder beneficiary in the first/primary

                                        Page 2 of 3
position for the total amount of medical assistance paid on their behalf at any age. In the
case where there is a community spouse and/or a minor or disabled child, the State
must be named in the second/secondary position as remainder beneficiary. The State or
its eligibility agencies shall require verification of the State being irrevocably named as
the remainder beneficiary in the correct position. As the beneficiary of the annuity, the
State is paid any remaining income/principal upon the death of the beneficiary per the
primary or secondary terms of the annuity contract.

What about Burial Policies and Burial Trusts?

Under New Jersey law, P.L. 1999 Chapter 193, funeral directors and insurers issuing
policies covering funeral expenses are required to forward to DMAHS any dollars
remaining in a Medicaid beneficiary's irrevocable funeral trust fund or burial insurance
policy after reasonable funeral expenses have been paid, but only if the deceased
received Medicaid or public assistance benefits.

What about Medicare Cost-Sharing Benefits?

Effective January 1, 2010, Medicare cost-sharing benefits paid by Medicaid under the
Medicare Savings Programs are not subject to estate recovery.

What expenses can be paid with assets of the deceased before paying Medicaid?

Reasonable funeral expenses, reasonable costs and expenses related to the
administration of the estate, and debts owed to the Office of the Public Guardian for
Elderly Adults can be paid with the assets of the deceased. DMAHS' claim is next in line,
together with debts and taxes with preference under federal or New Jersey law.

How will the estate know money is owed?

Those involved in handling the estate must contact DMAHS in writing as soon as
possible after the death of the Medicaid beneficiary or former Medicaid beneficiary. It is
their responsibility to notify DMAHS to find out if DMAHS has a claim against the estate
before any funds from the estate are spent (exception: reasonable funeral expenses may
be paid). Distributions to any creditors or heirs cannot be made until the estate
reimburses DMAHS if there is a Medicaid claim. Whoever is handling the estate should
write to:

                          DMAHS
                          Office of Legal and Regulatory Affairs
                          Attn: Estates
                          PO Box 712 - Mail Code #6
                          Trenton, NJ 08625

If you have any questions regarding estate recovery or need more information
about estate recovery, please call 609-588-2900.I




                                                                                 Rev 10/2017


                                        Page 3 of 3

