Source URL: https://www.nj.gov/humanservices/dmahs/documents/providers-stakeholders/resources/medicaid/2020/17-15%20Recoveries%20from%20Estates%20of%20Deceased%20Medicaid%20Beneficiaries%20and%20Former%20Medicaid%20Beneficiaries.2.2020.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-09-23

                                                  State of New Jersey
                                                 DEPARTMENT OF HUMAN SERVICES
PHILIP D. MURPHY                      DIVISION OF MEDICAL ASSISTANCE AND HEALTH SERVICES                             CAROLE JOHNSON
    Governor                                                 PO BOX 712                                               Commissioner

SHEILA Y. OLIVER                                      TRENTON, NJ 08625-0712                                   JENNIFER LANGER JACOBS
   Lt. Governor                                                                                                  Assistant Commissioner


           MEDICAID COMMUNICATION NO. 17-15                                       DATE: October 17, 2017+


           TO:                   NJ FamilyCare Eligibility Determining Agencies

           SUBJECT:          Recoveries from Estates of Deceased Medicaid Beneficiaries and
                             Former Medicaid Beneficiaries
                  *Replaces Medicaid Communication 10-08 issued on November 24, 2010*
                             +
                              Updated October 25, 2017; February 12, 2020

           The Division of Medical Assistance and Health Services (DMAHS) is reinforcing and
           updating guidelines that were previously issued in Medicaid Communications 10-08
           and 00-16 governing the recovery of correctly paid Medicaid benefits from the estates
           of deceased Medicaid beneficiaries or former Medicaid beneficiaries. The following is
           a list of important points to remember when determining eligibility and discussing this
           topic with applicants, beneficiaries, authorized representatives and families:
               • Medicaid payments for services received on or after age 55 are subject to
                   estate recovery. This is specifically stated on:
                       o the authorization/acknowledgement page of all NJ FamilyCare
                          applications (both online and paper version);
                       o the cardstock delivering the beneficiary’s health benefits identification
                          card;
                       o a separate insert included in all:
                              notices sent to beneficiary advising of the enrollment into a
                                 managed care organization
                              annual Aged, Blind and Disabled Program redetermination
                                 packets
                              redetermination notices (including administrative renewals) sent
                                 to beneficiaries

                  •   DMAHS has an immediate right to recover from the estate unless there is a
                      surviving spouse or child(ren) who is under age 21 or who is blind or
                      permanently and totally disabled according to Social Security standards at 42
                      U.S.C. 1382c. Should any of these exceptions to DMAHS’ right to recover from
                      an estate no longer apply (e.g., death of surviving spouse, attainment of age
                      21 by surviving child, or death or termination of disability of blind or
                      permanently and totally disabled child), DMAHS has a right to recover from
                      any remaining estate assets at that time.

                  •   Estate recovery in New Jersey includes payments for ALL services, not merely
                      services for institutionalized beneficiaries. There is no limitation on the type of


                        New Jersey Is An Equal Opportunity Employer      Printed on Recycled Paper and Recyclable
Page 2 of 7
Medicaid Communication 17-15

           •   service for which DMAHS can recover its payments from estates, including
               managed care (HMO) capitation fees regardless of whether services are
               received from a network provider. However, effective January 1, 2010,
               Medicare cost-sharing benefits paid under the Medicare Savings Programs
               such as “Buy-in”, Specified Low-Income Medicare Beneficiaries (“SLMB”) or
               Qualified Individuals (“QI-1”) are not subject to estate recovery.

           •   The estates of deceased beneficiaries who were enrolled in various Title XIX
               Waiver Programs ARE subject to recovery. The only current exceptions are
               the Home Care Expansion Program (HCEP) and Jersey Assistance for
               Community Caregiving Program (JACC), which are State-funded programs
               through other State Departments.

           •   The beneficiary’s primary residence, while exempt for eligibility purposes, is
               considered part of the beneficiary’s estate, and therefore is subject to
               recovery. It is also important to reinforce with applicants, beneficiaries and
               families that any interest that the beneficiary had in any property at the time of
               death will be considered part of the decedent’s estate, and therefore subject to
               recovery.

           •   Annuities are required to be disclosed upon application and recertification for
               Medicaid. For those annuities which are determined not to be subject to asset
               liquidation, the State of New Jersey must be named as the remainder
               beneficiary in the first/primary position for the total amount of medical
               assistance paid on their behalf. In the case where there is a community
               spouse and/or a minor or disabled child, the State must be named in the
               second/secondary position as remainder beneficiary. The State or its eligibility
               agencies shall require verification of the State being irrevocably named as the
               remainder beneficiary in the correct position and the State needs to be notified
               of any contractual changes in the annuities’ income or principal. The remaining
               benefits of an annuity not subject to liquidation prior to eligibility determination
               are payable to the State (primary or secondary position) regardless of the age
               of provided services

           •   “Estate” for Medicaid recovery purposes is defined by law to include any real
               or personal property and any assets in which the beneficiary had any legal title
               or interest at the time of death. Included for your reference is a copy of the
               pertinent regulation. Please note that the definition of “estate” appears at
               N.J.A.C. 10:49-14.1(e)2 and is quite comprehensive; also note that the term
               “other arrangements” used in that subsection includes testamentary trusts and
               annuities.

           •   Please remember that in the process of estate recovery, DMAHS will file a lien
               against the estate to recover all payments for services received on or after age
               55 (except for annuities).

           •   No distribution can be made to heirs or creditors from the estate other than for
               reasonable funeral expenses, costs associated with the administration of the
               estate, debts owed to the Office of the Public Guardian for Elderly Adults, and
Page 3 of 7
Medicaid Communication 17-15

           •   claims with preference under federal or state law (e.g., IRS liens) that may be
               superior to Medicaid’s (e.g. filed prior in time) without first satisfying the
               Medicaid program’s lien. When there are insufficient funds to pay all estate
               debts, the debts are paid consistent with N.J.S.A. 3B:22-2.

           •   Personal Needs Allowance account amounts are part of the individual’s estate and
               must be turned over to the estate executor/administrator and are used to satisfy
               creditors of the estate. Personal Needs Allowance balances can be used to satisfy
               any CWA or DFD claim for burial costs.

           •   A more detailed description of DMAHS’ estate recovery authority is contained
               in N.J.A.C. 10:49-14.1, a copy of which is attached.

        Also attached is a revised fact sheet entitled “The New Jersey Medicaid Program and
        Estate Recovery - What You Should Know.” This information sheet can be
        reproduced as needed and given to applicants/beneficiaries and their families at the
        time of application and redetermination to assist in their understanding of Medicaid
        estate recovery. The process of obtaining an applicant/beneficiary’s signature on the
        acknowledgement form which accompanied the fact sheet, as referenced in Medicaid
        Communication 10-08, is no longer required.

        Upon the death of the Medicaid beneficiary, County Welfare Agency (CWA) staff and
        State Eligibility Offices (ISS-Institutional Services Section) may refer the case to the
        Division’s Office of Legal and Regulatory Affairs, P.O. Box 712, Mail Code #6,
        Trenton, New Jersey 08625-0712. General information/questions concerning DMAHS
        estate recovery should be directed to 609-588-3016.
Page 4 of 7
Medicaid Communication 17-15

 JLJ:jm
 c:   Carole Johnson, Commissioner
      Department of Human Services

      Sarah Adelman, Deputy Commissioner
      Department of Human Services

      Elisa Neira, Deputy Commissioner
      Department of Human Services

      Natasha Johnson, Assistant Commissioner
      Division of Family Development

      Valerie Mielke, Assistant Commissioner
      Division of Mental Health and Addiction Services

      Jonathan Seifried, Assistant Commissioner
      Division of Developmental Disabilities

      Peri Nearon, Director
      Division of Disability Services

      Louise Rush, Director
      Division of Aging Services

      Christine Norbut Beyer, Commissioner
      Department of Children and Families

      Judith M. Persichilli, RN, BSN, MA, Commissioner
      Department of Health

      Joshua Lichtblau, Director
      Medicaid Fraud Division
      Office of the State Comptroller
Page 5 of 7
Medicaid Communication 17-15

                      ESTATE RECOVERY OF CORRECTLY PAID MEDICAID


    10:49-14.1 Recovery of payments correctly made
    a) Correctly paid benefits shall only be recoverable from the estate of an individual who was 65
    years of age or older when the individual received medical assistance if:
        1. The individual leaves no surviving spouse;
        2. For estates of individuals who died between February 1, 1984 and October 20, 1992, the
    individual left no surviving child;
        3. For estates of individuals who died on or after October 21, 1992, the individual leaves no
    surviving child who is under the age of 21 or any surviving blind or permanently and totally disabled
    children;
        4. The amount to be recovered is in excess of $ 500.00; and
        5. The gross estate is in excess of $ 3,000.

    (b) Paragraphs (a)4 and 5 above shall apply to recoveries from the estates of individuals who died
    on or after July 20, 1981, but prior to December 22, 1995.

    (c) For estates of individuals who died on or after April 1, 1995, in addition to the recoveries
    authorized under (a) and (b) above, any Medicaid payments correctly made on or after October 1,
    1993, on behalf of individuals who received services on or after age 55 but prior to age 65, are
    recoverable from the estates of those individuals, subject to the conditions set forth in (a)1, 3, 4 and
    5 and (b) above.

    (d) Effective for estates created on or after October 4, 1999, the Division shall file any claim or lien
    against an estate under this section within three years after receiving actual written notice from the
    personal representative of the estate or any other interested party of the death of the Medicaid
    beneficiary.

    (e) For estates of individuals who died on or after December 22, 1995, Medicaid claims under this
    section shall be deemed preferred claims, with a priority equivalent to that under subsection c. of
    N.J.S.A. 3B:22-2, that is, debts and taxes with preference under Federal or State law.

    (f) The personal representative of the estate of a deceased Medicaid beneficiary or any other
    interested party, upon request to the Division, may obtain a "payoff statement" on the amount due
    under the claim, if that information is available to the Division at the time the request is received.

    (g) Effective for estates pending on or created after October 4, 1999, if a family member of a
    deceased Medicaid beneficiary has, prior to the beneficiary's death, continuously resided in a home
    owned by the beneficiary at the time of the beneficiary's death, and that home was the beneficiary's
    primary residence, and was and remains the family member's primary residence, the Division may
    record a lien against the property, but will not enforce the lien until the property is voluntarily sold, or
    the resident family member either dies or vacates the property.

    (h) For estates of individuals who died on or after October 1, 1993, which are subject to a recovery
    claim under this section which was either pending on or initiated after March 1, 1995, the estate
    representative may apply to the Division for a waiver or compromise of the claim based upon
    grounds of undue hardship, subject to the following policies and procedures:
            1. Undue hardship can be demonstrated only if the estate subject to recovery is or would
        become the sole income-producing asset of the survivors, and pursuit of recovery is likely to
        result in one or more of those survivors becoming eligible for public assistance and/or Medicaid
        benefits.
Page 6 of 7
Medicaid Communication 17-15

       2. There shall be a rebuttable presumption that no undue hardship exists if the hardship
   resulted from estate planning methods under which assets were divested in order to avoid
   estate recovery.
       3. Upon receipt of written notice that the estate is subject to a recovery claim by the Division,
   the estate representative shall have 20 days from the date of receipt of the notice to file a
   request for a waiver or compromise of the Division's claim based upon undue hardship, together
   with evidence in support of the request. If that request is not received by the Division within the
   time limit specified, the Division shall not grant a waiver or compromise based upon undue
   hardship. Upon receipt of a timely request, the Division shall evaluate the request and the
   evidence submitted, and shall notify the applicant in writing of its decision within 45 days from
   the date that the request was received. If the estate representative wishes to contest the
   Division's decision, a written request for a hearing shall be submitted to the Division within 20
   days from the date of receipt of that decision, in accordance with the provisions of N.J.A.C.
   10:49-10. This request shall be forwarded by the Division to the Office of Administrative Law
   (OAL), which shall notify the parties of the hearing date and venue, and shall provide a
   description of the hearing process. Subsequent to the hearing, the formal decision of the OAL
   shall include a description of the process leading to the final agency decision and the appeal
   rights available to both parties.

(i) The Division may elect not to pursue a claim under this section against the estate of an individual
who died on or after December 22, 1995, if it determines, in its sole discretion, that to do so would
not be cost-effective.

(j) For all estate recoveries pending on or initiated after October 4, 1999, no lien of any kind,
inchoate or otherwise, and no right of recovery can either exist or be pursued until all of the
conditions set forth in N.J.S.A. 30:4D-7.2a are met, including the absence of any surviving spouse
or of any minor, blind, or permanently and totally disabled children.

(k) For all estate recoveries pending on or initiated on or after October 4, 1999, even when the
statutory conditions for lien filing and recovery are met, recovery shall not be pursued against
property held by any bona fide purchaser who has paid fair market value for the property, but shall
be sought from the estate.

(l) For purposes of this section, the term "estate" with respect to a deceased Medicaid beneficiary
shall include:
         1. All real and personal property and other assets included within the individual's estate, as
     defined in N.J.S.A. 3B:1-1; and
         2. For individuals who died on or after April 1, 1995, the term "estate" shall also include any
     other real and personal property and other assets in which the Medicaid beneficiary had any
     legal title or interest at the time of death, to the extent of that interest, including assets conveyed
     to a survivor, heir or assign of the beneficiary through joint tenancy, tenancy in common,
     survivorship, life estate, living trust or other arrangement, as well as any proceeds from the sale
     of any such property which remain in the estate of the survivor, heir or assign of the beneficiary,
     to the extent of the beneficiary's interest;
                  i. Effective for future estates or estate recoveries pending on or after October 4,
              1999, for purposes of this subsection, the term "life estate" shall mean a life estate
              created upon the death of a beneficiary;
                  ii. Effective for future estates or estate recoveries pending on or after October 4,
              1999, for purposes of this subsection, the term "other arrangement" shall include, but not
              be limited to, any trust or annuity in which the beneficiary had an interest at the time of
              death, including a trust or annuity established by a third party, subject to the exclusions
              discussed in (n) below.

(m) Any lien filed on or after October 4, 1999 against an estate as described in (l)2 above shall
Page 7 of 7
Medicaid Communication 17-15

describe the extent of the deceased Medicaid beneficiary's interest covered by the lien, if known to
the Division at the time the lien is filed. For example, if a deceased Medicaid beneficiary at the time
of his death owned real property as a tenant-in-common with another individual, the lien should
state that it encumbers only 50 percent of the equity in the real property. If the deceased Medicaid
beneficiary held a tenancy-by-the-entirety or joint tenancy with a right of survivorship, then the lien
shall state that it encumbers all of the property. If the Division is not aware of the extent of the
beneficiary's interest at the time that the lien is filed, the full amount of the Division's claim shall be
listed on the lien.

(n) For purposes of this section, for future estates or estates pending on or after October 4, 1999,
the term "estate" shall not include:
        1. A life estate in which the beneficiary held an interest during his or her lifetime, but which
    expired upon the Medicaid beneficiary's death;
        2. An inter vivos trust established by a third party for the benefit of the now-deceased
    Medicaid beneficiary, provided that:
                 i. The trust is a discretionary trust, constructed in such a way that the Medicaid
            beneficiary could not compel distributions from the trust; and
                 ii. The trust contains no assets in which the Medicaid beneficiary held any interest
            within either five years prior to applying for Medicaid benefits, or five years prior to the
            Medicaid beneficiary's death; or
        3. A testamentary trust established by a third party (including the spouse of the now-
    deceased Medicaid beneficiary) for the benefit of the now-deceased Medicaid beneficiary,
    provided that:
                 i. The trust is a discretionary trust, constructed in such a way that the Medicaid
            beneficiary could not compel distributions from the trust; and
                 ii. The trust contains no assets in which the Medicaid beneficiary held any interest
            within either five years prior to applying for Medicaid benefits, or five years prior to the
            beneficiary's death. Assets of the community spouse which formed a part of the
            community spouse resource allowance shall not be considered assets of the Medicaid
            beneficiary. Any assets of the community spouse other than those that formed part of
            the community spouse resource allowance shall be considered assets of the Medicaid
            beneficiary if acquired from the Medicaid beneficiary within five years prior to the date of
            application for Medicaid benefits or five years prior to the date of death of the Medicaid
            beneficiary.
              The New Jersey Medicaid Program and Estate Recovery
                            What You Should Know



What is Estate Recovery?

Under federal and New Jersey law, the Division of Medical Assistance and Health
Services (DMAHS) is required to recover funds from the estates of certain deceased
Medicaid beneficiaries, or former Medicaid beneficiaries, for all payments provided
through the Medicaid program for services received on or after age 55. This includes,
but is not limited to, capitation payments made to any managed care organization,
transportation broker, PACE provider, or any other capitated provider, regardless of
whether any services were received from an individual or entity that would have been
reimbursed by the managed care organization, transportation broker, PACE provider, or
other provider that is paid by capitation payments.

Why Estate Recovery?

DMAHS pursues recovery from estates to supplement funds available for medical
assistance programs and limit the burden upon taxpayers caused by rising medical
costs. Funds recovered help provide assistance to others in need.

Who is Affected?

The estates of beneficiaries or former beneficiaries who were 55 years of age or older at
the time they received services may be affected.

What is an Estate?

For Medicaid estate recovery purposes, an estate includes any property that belonged to
the deceased at the time of death or at the moment prior to their death. By law, estates
include property such as the decedent's home or share of a home, bank accounts
(whether solely or jointly held), trusts and annuities, stocks and bonds, and any other
real or personal property. It is important to understand that even though the deceased's
share of property may pass to survivor(s), it continues to be considered as part of the
estate for New Jersey Medicaid recovery purposes.

Will DMAHS seek recovery immediately upon death?

Yes, if the deceased has no surviving spouse, and has no surviving child under age 21,
and no surviving child who is blind or permanently and totally disabled according to
Social Security standards at 42 USC 1382c. The only time that recovery will not be
pursued is:    I
   1. If it would not be cost-effective to do so; or,
   2. If property in the estate is the sole source of income for one or more of the
                                         Page 1 of 3
       survivors and pursuit of recovery is likely to result in one or more of those
       survivors becoming eligible for public assistance and/or Medicaid benefits; or,
   3. If a family member of a deceased Medicaid beneficiary has, prior to the
      beneficiary's death, continuously resided in a home owned by the beneficiary at
      the time of the beneficiary's death, and that home was the client's primary
      residence, and was, and remains, the family member's primary residence,
      DMAHS may record a lien against the property, but will not enforce the lien until
      the property is voluntarily sold, or the resident family member either dies or
      vacates the property.

When will DMAHS not seek recovery immediately upon death?

DMAHS will not seek recovery if there is a surviving spouse or a surviving child who is
under the age of 21, or is blind or permanently and totally disabled according to Social
Security standards at 42 USC 1382c. In that case, repayment would be postponed until:
 1. The child reached the age of 21, or,
 2. The time of the spouse or child's death.
When any of these exceptions to DMAHS' right to recover from an estate no longer
apply (i.e., as a result of the death of a surviving spouse, attainment of age 21 by a
surviving child, and/or recovery from disability or death of a blind or permanently and
totally disabled child), DMAHS has a right to recover from any remaining estate assets
at that time.

What should I know about Medicaid liens? Will the Medicaid program file a
lien against my home and property?

A Medicaid lien is a claim placed against a deceased person's property to ensure that the
estate pays a debt.

When you apply for Medicaid, a lien is not filed against your property. A lien is placed on
property after the death of a Medicaid beneficiary or former beneficiary who received
services on or after age 55 if there is no surviving spouse, no surviving child under 21
years old, and no surviving child who is blind or totally and permanently disabled. The
amount claimed as a lien will be equal to the amount of all Medicaid assistance DMAHS
provided for services received on or after age 55, including any capitation payments
made to a Medicaid health plan or other entity on the beneficiary's behalf.

What about Life Insurance Policies?

Proceeds from life insurance policies are considered the assets of the named
beneficiaries. Proceeds from whole life policies are subject to estate recovery if they are
not liquidated prior to death as required. Proceeds from any policy are considered
recoverable when the proceeds are paid to the beneficiary's estate as the named
beneficiary or as a default beneficiary including when another named insurance
beneficiary predeceases (dies before or at the same time as) the Medicaid beneficiary.

What about Annuities?

Annuities, which are determined not to be subject to asset liquidation prior to eligibility,
must name the State of New Jersey as the remainder beneficiary in the first/primary

                                        Page 2 of 3
position for the total amount of medical assistance paid on their behalf at any age. In the
case where there is a community spouse and/or a minor or disabled child, the State
must be named in the second/secondary position as remainder beneficiary. The State or
its eligibility agencies shall require verification of the State being irrevocably named as
the remainder beneficiary in the correct position. As the beneficiary of the annuity, the
State is paid any remaining income/principal upon the death of the beneficiary per the
primary or secondary terms of the annuity contract.

What about Burial Policies and Burial Trusts?

Under New Jersey law, P.L. 1999 Chapter 193, funeral directors and insurers issuing
policies covering funeral expenses are required to forward to DMAHS any dollars
remaining in a Medicaid beneficiary's irrevocable funeral trust fund or burial insurance
policy after reasonable funeral expenses have been paid, but only if the deceased
received Medicaid or public assistance benefits.

What about Medicare Cost-Sharing Benefits?

Effective January 1, 2010, Medicare cost-sharing benefits paid by Medicaid under the
Medicare Savings Programs are not subject to estate recovery.

What expenses can be paid with assets of the deceased before paying Medicaid?

Reasonable funeral expenses, reasonable costs and expenses related to the
administration of the estate, and debts owed to the Office of the Public Guardian for
Elderly Adults can be paid with the assets of the deceased. DMAHS' claim is next in line,
together with debts and taxes with preference under federal or New Jersey law.

How will the estate know money is owed?

Those involved in handling the estate must contact DMAHS in writing as soon as
possible after the death of the Medicaid beneficiary or former Medicaid beneficiary. It is
their responsibility to notify DMAHS to find out if DMAHS has a claim against the estate
before any funds from the estate are spent (exception: reasonable funeral expenses may
be paid). Distributions to any creditors or heirs cannot be made until the estate
reimburses DMAHS if there is a Medicaid claim. Whoever is handling the estate should
write to:

                          DMAHS
                          Office of Legal and Regulatory Affairs
                          Attn: Estates
                          PO Box 712 - Mail Code #6
                          Trenton, NJ 08625

If you have any questions regarding estate recovery or need more information
about estate recovery, please call 609-588-2900.I




                                                                                 Rev 10/2017


                                        Page 3 of 3

