Source URL: https://www.law.cornell.edu/regulations/new-jersey/N-J-A-C-10-49-14-1
Retrieved: 2026-09-23

N.J. Admin. Code § 10:49-14.1 - Recovery of payments correctly made | State Regulations | US Law | LII / Legal Information Institute 

 Please help us improve our site!

 × 

 No thank you 

 Skip to main content 

 Cornell Law
 School 
 Search
 Cornell 

 Toggle navigation 

 Please help
 us improve our site! 

 Support Us! 

 Search 

 About
 LII 

 Who We Are 

 What We Do 

 Who Pays For This 

 Contact Us 

 Get the
 law 

 Constitution 

 Supreme Court 

 U.S. Code 

 CFR 

 Federal Rules 

 Federal Rules of Appellate Procedure 

 Federal Rules of Civil Procedure 

 Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure 

 Federal Rules of Evidence 

 Federal Rules of Bankruptcy Procedure 

 U.C.C. 

 Law by jurisdiction 

 State law 

 Uniform laws 

 Federal law 

 World law 

 Lawyer directory 

 Legal encyclopedia 

 Business law 

 Constitutional law 

 Criminal law 

 Family law 

 Employment law 

 Money and Finances 

 More... 

 Help out 

 Give 

 Sponsor 

 Advertise 

 Create 

 Promote 

 Join Lawyer Directory 

 LII 

 State Regulations 

 New Jersey Administrative Code 

 Title 10 - HUMAN SERVICES 

 N.J. Admin. Code Tit. 10, ch. 49 - ADMINISTRATION MANUAL 

 Subchapter 14 - RECOVERY OF PAYMENTS AND SANCTIONS 

 N.J. Admin. Code § 10:49-14.1 - Recovery of payments correctly made

 N.J. Admin. Code § 10:49-14.1 - Recovery of payments correctly made 

 State Regulations 

 Compare

 (a) Correctly
 paid benefits shall only be recoverable from the estate of an individual who
 was 65 years of age or older when the individual received medical assistance
 if: 1. The individual leaves no surviving
 spouse;

 2. For estates of
 individuals who died between February 1, 1984 and October 20, 1992, the
 individual left no surviving child;

 3. For estates of individuals who died on or
 after October 21, 1992, the individual leaves no surviving child who is under
 the age of 21 or any surviving blind or permanently and totally disabled
 children;

 4. The amount to be
 recovered is in excess of $ 500.00; and

 5. The gross estate is in excess of $
 3,000.

 (b) Paragraphs
 (a)4 and 5 above shall apply to recoveries from the estates of individuals who
 died on or after July 20, 1981, but prior to December 22, 1995.

 (c) For estates of individuals who died on or
 after April 1, 1995, in addition to the recoveries authorized under (a) and (b)
 above, any Medicaid payments correctly made on or after October 1, 1993, on
 behalf of individuals who received services on or after age 55 but prior to age
 65, are recoverable from the estates of those individuals, subject to the
 conditions set forth in (a)1, 3, 4 and 5 and (b) above.

 (d) Effective for estates created on or after
 October 4, 1999, the Division shall file any claim or lien against an estate
 under this section within three years after receiving actual written notice
 from the personal representative of the estate or any other interested party of
 the death of the Medicaid beneficiary.

 (e) For estates of individuals who died on or
 after December 22, 1995, Medicaid claims under this section shall be deemed
 preferred claims, with a priority equivalent to that under subsection c. of
 N.J.S.A.
 3B:22-2 , that is, debts and taxes with
 preference under Federal or State law.

 (f) The personal representative of the estate
 of a deceased Medicaid beneficiary or any other interested party, upon request
 to the Division, may obtain a "payoff statement" on the amount due under the
 claim, if that information is available to the Division at the time the request
 is received.

 (g) Effective for
 estates pending on or created after October 4, 1999, if a family member of a
 deceased Medicaid beneficiary has, prior to the beneficiary's death,
 continuously resided in a home owned by the beneficiary at the time of the
 beneficiary's death, and that home was the beneficiary's primary residence, and
 was and remains the family member's primary residence, the Division may record
 a lien against the property, but will not enforce the lien until the property
 is voluntarily sold, or the resident family member either dies or vacates the
 property.

 (h) For estates of
 individuals who died on or after October 1, 1993, which are subject to a
 recovery claim under this section which was either pending on or initiated
 after March 1, 1995, the estate representative may apply to the Division for a
 waiver or compromise of the claim based upon grounds of undue hardship, subject
 to the following policies and procedures: 1. 
 Undue hardship can be demonstrated only if the estate subject to recovery is or
 would become the sole income-producing asset of the survivors, and pursuit of
 recovery is likely to result in one or more of those survivors becoming
 eligible for public assistance and/or Medicaid benefits.

 2. There shall be a rebuttable presumption
 that no undue hardship exists if the hardship resulted from estate planning
 methods under which assets were divested in order to avoid estate
 recovery.

 3. Upon receipt of
 written notice that the estate is subject to a recovery claim by the Division,
 the estate representative shall have 20 days from the date of receipt of the
 notice to file a request for a waiver or compromise of the Division's claim
 based upon undue hardship, together with evidence in support of the request. If
 that request is not received by the Division within the time limit specified,
 the Division shall not grant a waiver or compromise based upon undue hardship.
 Upon receipt of a timely request, the Division shall evaluate the request and
 the evidence submitted, and shall notify the applicant in writing of its
 decision within 45 days from the date that the request was received. If the
 estate representative wishes to contest the Division's decision, a written
 request for a hearing shall be submitted to the Division within 20 days from
 the date of receipt of that decision, in accordance with the provisions of
 N.J.A.C. 10:49-10. This request shall be forwarded by the Division to the
 Office of Administrative Law (OAL), which shall notify the parties of the
 hearing date and venue, and shall provide a description of the hearing process.
 Subsequent to the hearing, the formal decision of the OAL shall include a
 description of the process leading to the final agency decision and the appeal
 rights available to both parties.

 (i) The Division may elect not to pursue a
 claim under this section against the estate of an individual who died on or
 after December 22, 1995, if it determines, in its sole discretion, that to do
 so would not be cost-effective.

 (j) 
 For all estate recoveries pending on or initiated after October 4, 1999, no
 lien of any kind, inchoate or otherwise, and no right of recovery can either
 exist or be pursued until all of the conditions set forth in
 N.J.S.A.
 30:4D-7.2a are met, including the absence of
 any surviving spouse or of any minor, blind, or permanently and totally
 disabled children.

 (k) For all
 estate recoveries pending on or initiated on or after October 4, 1999, even
 when the statutory conditions for lien filing and recovery are met, recovery
 shall not be pursued against property held by any bona fide purchaser who has
 paid fair market value for the property, but shall be sought from the
 estate.

 ( l ) For
 purposes of this section, the term "estate" with respect to a deceased Medicaid
 beneficiary shall include: 1. All real and
 personal property and other assets included within the individual's estate, as
 defined in
 N.J.S.A.
 3B:1-1 ; and

 2. For individuals who died on or after April
 1, 1995, the term "estate" shall also include any other real and personal
 property and other assets in which the Medicaid beneficiary had any legal title
 or interest at the time of death, to the extent of that interest, including
 assets conveyed to a survivor, heir or assign of the beneficiary through joint
 tenancy, tenancy in common, survivorship, life estate, living trust or other
 arrangement, as well as any proceeds from the sale of any such property which
 remain in the estate of the survivor, heir or assign of the beneficiary, to the
 extent of the beneficiary's interest; i. 
 Effective for future estates or estate recoveries pending on or after October
 4, 1999, for purposes of this subsection, the term "life estate" shall mean a
 life estate created upon the death of a beneficiary;

 ii. Effective for future estates or estate
 recoveries pending on or after October 4, 1999, for purposes of this
 subsection, the term "other arrangement" shall include, but not be limited to,
 any trust or annuity in which the beneficiary had an interest at the time of
 death, including a trust or annuity established by a third party, subject to
 the exclusions discussed in (n) below.

 (m) Any lien filed on or after October 4,
 1999 against an estate as described in ( l )2 above shall
 describe the extent of the deceased Medicaid beneficiary's interest covered by
 the lien, if known to the Division at the time the lien is filed. For example,
 if a deceased Medicaid beneficiary at the time of his death owned real property
 as a tenant-in-common with another individual, the lien should state that it
 encumbers only 50 percent of the equity in the real property. If the deceased
 Medicaid beneficiary held a tenancy-by-the-entirety or joint tenancy with a
 right of survivorship, then the lien shall state that it encumbers all of the
 property. If the Division is not aware of the extent of the beneficiary's
 interest at the time that the lien is filed, the full amount of the Division's
 claim shall be listed on the lien.

 (n) For purposes of this section, for future
 estates or estates pending on or after October 4, 1999, the term "estate" shall
 not include: 1. A life estate in which the
 beneficiary held an interest during his or her lifetime, but which expired upon
 the Medicaid beneficiary's death;

 2. An inter vivos trust established by a
 third party for the benefit of the now-deceased Medicaid beneficiary, provided
 that: i. The trust is a discretionary trust,
 constructed in such a way that the Medicaid beneficiary could not compel
 distributions from the trust; and

 ii. The trust contains no assets in which the
 Medicaid beneficiary held any interest within either five years prior to
 applying for Medicaid benefits, or five years prior to the Medicaid
 beneficiary's death; or

 3. A testamentary trust established by a
 third party (including the spouse of the now-deceased Medicaid beneficiary) for
 the benefit of the now-deceased Medicaid beneficiary, provided that:
 i. The trust is a discretionary trust,
 constructed in such a way that the Medicaid beneficiary could not compel
 distributions from the trust; and

 ii. The trust contains no assets in which the
 Medicaid beneficiary held any interest within either five years prior to
 applying for Medicaid benefits, or five years prior to the beneficiary's death.
 Assets of the community spouse which formed a part of the community spouse
 resource allowance shall not be considered assets of the Medicaid beneficiary.
 Any assets of the community spouse other than those that formed part of the
 community spouse resource allowance shall be considered assets of the Medicaid
 beneficiary if acquired from the Medicaid beneficiary within five years prior
 to the date of application for Medicaid benefits or five years prior to the
 date of death of the Medicaid beneficiary.

 Notes

 N.J. Admin.
 Code §
 10:49-14.1 

 Amended by R.1994 d.524,
 effective 10/17/1994 .

 See: 26 N.J.R. 2757(a), 26 N.J.R. 4184(b). 
 Amended by
 R.1999 d.332, effective 10/4/1999 . 
 See: 31 N.J.R. 242(a),
 31 N.J.R. 2883(a). 
 In (a), in the introductory text, substituted
 "the individual" for "he or she", in (a)2, substituted "of individuals who
 died" for "coming into being", inserted "1," following "February", and
 substituted "left" for "leaving", in (a)3, substituted "of individuals who
 died" for "coming into being", in (b), substituted "but prior to December 22,
 1995" for "the effective date of P.L. 1981, c.217 ( N.J.S.A.
 30:4D-7.2a )", and added (c) to (n).

 Amended by R.2013 d.079, effective 5/20/2013 . 
 See: 45 N.J.R. 107(a),
 45 N.J.R. 1249(b). 
 In (d), substituted "three years" for "90
 days". 

 State regulations are updated quarterly; we currently have two versions available.
 Below is a comparison between our most recent version and the prior quarterly release. 
 More comparison features will be added as we have more versions to compare.

 No prior version found.

 State Regulations Toolbox

 Accessibility 

 About LII 

 Contact us 

 Advertise here 

 Help 

 Terms of use 

 Privacy
