Source URL: https://codes.findlaw.com/nj/title-30-institutions-and-agencies/nj-st-sect-30-4d-7-2/
Retrieved: 2026-09-23

New Jersey Statutes Title 30. Institutions and Agencies 30 § 4D-7.2 | FindLaw 

 Skip to main content 

 Find a Lawyer 

 Find a Lawyer

 Legal Forms & Services

 Learn About the Law

 Learn About the Law

 Explore Legal Topics 

 Search Laws by State 

 Search Case Law 

 Search U.S. Codes 

 Legal Professionals

 Legal Professionals

 Legal Professional Resources 

 Law Firm Marketing 

 Blogs

 Find a Lawyer

 Search Legal Topics

 Begin typing to search, use arrow keys to navigate, use enter to select

 Legal Issue 

 More Options 

 Name Search

 Browse Legal Issues

 Browse Law Firms

 Support

 City, ZIP Code or County 

 Enter either your legal issue or location to continue

 Find a Lawyer 

 Search by Legal Topic

 Enter legal topic 

 Get the Information 

 CODES / 
 New Jersey / 
 Title 30. Institutions and Agencies / 
 30 § 4D-7.2 

 New Jersey Statutes Title 30. Institutions and Agencies 30 § 4D-7.2

 Current as of January 01, 2024 | Updated by Findlaw Staff 

 a. (1) A lien may be filed against and recovery sought from the estate of a deceased
 recipient for assistance correctly paid or to be paid on his behalf for all services
 received when he was 65 years of age or older, except as provided in section 1 of
 P.L.1981, c. 217 ( C.30:4D-7.2a ).

 (2) In the case of a recipient who became deceased on or after April 1, 1995 for whom
 a Medicaid payment was made on or after October 1, 1993, a lien may be filed against
 and recovery sought from the estate of the deceased recipient for assistance correctly
 paid or to be paid on his behalf for all services received when he was 55 years of
 age or older, except as provided in section 1 of P.L.1981, c. 217 ( C.30:4D-7.2a ).

 (3) As used in this section, “ estate ” includes all real and personal property and other assets included in the recipient's
 estate as defined in N.J.S.3B:1-1 , as well as any other real and personal property and other assets in which the recipient
 had any legal title or interest at the time of death, to the extent of that interest,
 including assets conveyed to a survivor, heir or assign of the recipient through joint
 tenancy, tenancy in common, survivorship, life estate, living trust or other arrangement.

 “Estate” shall not include amounts received as reparations or restitution for the
 loss of liberty or damage to health by the victims of National Socialist persecution;
 returns of tangible or intangible property seized, misappropriated or lost as a result
 of National Socialist actions or policies and any cash values in replacement of such
 property; payments of insurance policies purchased by the victims of National Socialist
 persecution; and any accumulated or accrued interest on such amounts. National Socialist actions or policies include, but are not limited to, actions
 and policies taken by Germany and other countries, or by organizations and institutions
 within those countries, against the victims of the Nazi Holocaust. 

 b. A lien may be filed by the division against a third party's property, whether real
 or personal, or against any interest or estate in property, whether vested or contingent.

 Subject to section 6 of P.L.1979, c. 365 ( C.30:4D-7.1 ), any third party recovery obtained by the division under this subsection shall not
 be reduced by any counsel fees, costs, or other expenses, or portions thereof, incurred
 by the recipient or the recipient's attorney.

 c. A certificate of debt may be filed by the division against such parties and in
 such a manner as is specified in subsection (h) of section 17 of P.L.1968, c. 413
 ( C.30:4D-17 ).

 d. (1) A lien, claim or encumbrance imposed by this act shall be deemed a preferred
 claim against the recipient's estate and shall have a priority equivalent to that
 under subsection d. of N.J.S.3B:22-2 .

 (2) In the case of a recipient who became deceased on or after the effective date
 of P.L.1995, c. 289, a lien, claim or encumbrance imposed pursuant to this section shall be deemed a preferred
 claim against the recipient's estate and shall have a priority equivalent to that
 under subsection c. of N.J.S.3B:22-2 .

 Previous Part of Code 

 Next Part of Code 

 Back to Chapter List 

 Copy 

 Cite this article: FindLaw.com - New Jersey Statutes Title 30. Institutions and Agencies 30 § 4D-7.2 - last updated January 01, 2024  |
 https://codes.findlaw.com/nj/title-30-institutions-and-agencies/nj-st-sect-30-4d-7-2/ 

 FindLaw Codes may not reflect the most recent version of the law in your jurisdiction. Please verify the status of the code you are researching with the state legislature before relying on it for your legal needs.

 Was this helpful? 

 Yes 

 No 

 Easy to understand 

 Solved my problem 

 Other 

 Missing the information I need 

 Too complicated / too many steps 

 Out of date 

 Other 

 Submit 

 Cancel 

 Search all New Jersey Codes

 Keyword or Citation (Required)

 View Results 

 Welcome to FindLaw's Cases & Codes

 A free source of state and federal court opinions, state laws, and the United States Code. For more information about the legal concepts addressed by these cases and statutes, visit FindLaw’s Learn About the Law.

 Go to Learn About the Law 

 Did FindLaw Help You Understand This Legal Issue?

 Make It a Preferred Google Search Source

 Add to Google 

 Latest Blog Posts

 SEC Opens Door for Crypto-Style Trading of U.S. Stocks 

 A Third of Americans Can’t Name the Three Branches of Government. Here’s Why That Affects Your Rights. 

 Contract Buzz: Sixth Circuit Reversal Highlights Difficulty in Litigation Involving Cannabis 

 New Study: High Rates of Depression, Burnout Continue Among Attorneys 

 Explore all 

 For Legal Professionals

 Practice Management 

 Corporate Counsel 

 Legal Technology 

 Law Students 

 Learn About The Law

 Get help with your legal needs

 FindLaw’s Learn About the Law features thousands of informational articles to help you understand your options. And if you’re ready to hire an attorney,  find one in your area  who can help.

 Go to Learn About the Law 

 Need to Find an Attorney?

 Search our directory by legal issue

 Enter information in one or both fields (Required)

 Legal Issue

 More Options 

 Name Search 

 Browse Legal Issues 

 Browse Law Firms 

 Support 

 City, ZIP Code or County 

 Enter either your legal issue or location to continue 

 Find a Lawyer 

 Copied to clipboard

 Back to Top 

 Questions?

 At FindLaw.com, we pride ourselves on being the number one source of
 free legal information and resources on the web. 

 Contact us.

 Stay up-to-date with how the law affects your life. 

 Sign up for our consumer newsletter.

 ENTER YOUR EMAIL ADDRESS (Required)

 Thank you for subscribing!

 follow us: 

 ABOUT US 

 Our Team 

 Accessibility 

 Contact Us 

 FIND A LAWYER 

 By Location 

 By Legal Issue 

 By Lawyer Profiles 

 By Name 

 SELF-HELP RESOURCES 

 Legal Forms & Services 

 LEGAL RESEARCH 

 Learn About the Law 

 State Laws 

 U.S. Caselaw 

 U.S. Codes 

 LEGAL NETWORK 

 FindLaw.com : Free, trusted legal information for consumers and legal professionals 

 SuperLawyers.com : Directory of U.S. attorneys with the exclusive Super Lawyers rating 

 Abogado.com : The #1 Spanish-language legal website for consumers 

 LawInfo.com : Nationwide attorney directory and legal consumer resources 

 Copyright © 2026, FindLaw. All rights reserved.

 Terms 

 Privacy 

 Disclaimer 

 Cookies 

 Manage Preferences 

 Skip to main content
