Source URL: https://www.law.cornell.edu/regulations/new-mexico/N-M-Admin-Code-SS-8.200.430.19_v2
Retrieved: 2026-09-23

N.M. Admin. Code § 8.200.430.19 - [Effective 11/1/2024] MAD ESTATE RECOVERY | State Regulations | US Law | LII / Legal Information Institute 

 Please help us improve our site!

 × 

 No thank you 

 Skip to main content 

 Cornell Law
 School 
 Search
 Cornell 

 Toggle navigation 

 Please help
 us improve our site! 

 Support Us! 

 Search 

 About
 LII 

 Who We Are 

 What We Do 

 Who Pays For This 

 Contact Us 

 Get the
 law 

 Constitution 

 Supreme Court 

 U.S. Code 

 CFR 

 Federal Rules 

 Federal Rules of Appellate Procedure 

 Federal Rules of Civil Procedure 

 Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure 

 Federal Rules of Evidence 

 Federal Rules of Bankruptcy Procedure 

 U.C.C. 

 Law by jurisdiction 

 State law 

 Uniform laws 

 Federal law 

 World law 

 Lawyer directory 

 Legal encyclopedia 

 Business law 

 Constitutional law 

 Criminal law 

 Family law 

 Employment law 

 Money and Finances 

 More... 

 Help out 

 Give 

 Sponsor 

 Advertise 

 Create 

 Promote 

 Join Lawyer Directory 

 LII 

 State Regulations 

 New Mexico Administrative Code 

 Title 8 - SOCIAL SERVICES 

 Chapter 200 - MEDICAID ELIGIBILITY - GENERAL RECIPIENT POLICIES 

 N.M. Admin. Code tit. 8, ch. 200, pt. 430 - RECIPIENT RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES 

 N.M. Admin. Code § 8.200.430.19 - [Effective 11/1/2024] MAD ESTATE RECOVERY

 N.M. Admin. Code § 8.200.430.19 - [Effective 11/1/2024] MAD ESTATE RECOVERY 

 State Regulations 

 Compare

 HCA is mandated to seek recovery from the estates of certain individuals up to the amount of medical assistance payments made by the HCA on behalf of the individual. See Social Security Act Section 1917 (42 USC 1396p(b) and Section 27 -2A-1 et seq., NMSA 1978 "Medicaid Estate Recovery Act").

 A. 
 Definitions used in MAD estate recovery: 
 (1) Authorized representative: The individual designated to represent and act on the eligible recipient's behalf. The eligible recipient or authorized representative must provide formal documentation authorizing the named individual or individuals to access the identified case information for a specified purpose and time frame. An authorized representative may be an attorney representing a person or household , a person acting under the authority of a valid power of attorney, a guardian, or any other individual or individuals designated in writing by the member.

 (2) Estate: Real and personal property and other assets of an individual subject to probate or administration pursuant to the New Mexico Uniform Probate Code.

 (3) Medical assistance: Amounts paid by HCA for long term care services including related hospital and prescription drug services.

 B. 
 Basis for defining the group: A MAP eligible recipient who was 55 years of age or older when medical assistance payments were made on their behalf for nursing facilities services, home and community based services, and related hospital and prescription drug services are subject to estate recovery.

 C. 
 The following exemptions apply to estate recovery: 
 (1) Qualified medicare beneficiaries, specified low-income beneficiaries, qualifying individuals, and qualified disabled and working individuals, are exempt from estate recovery for the receipt of hospital and prescription drug services unless they are concurrently in a MAP nursing facility category of eligibility or on a home and community based services waiver ; this provision applies to medicare cost-sharing benefits (i.e., Part A and Part B premiums, deductibles, coinsurance, and co-payments) paid under the medicare savings programs.

 (2) Certain income, resources, and property are exempted from MAD estate recovery for native Americans: (a) interest in and income derived from tribal land and other resources held in trust status and judgment funds from the Indian claims commission and the United States claims court;

 (b) ownership interest in trust or non-trust property, including real property and improvements; (i) located on a reservation or near a reservation as designated and approved by the bureau of Indian affairs of the U.S, department of interior; or

 (ii) for any federally-recognized tribe located within the most recent boundaries of a prior federal reservation; and

 (iii) protection of non-trust property described in Subparagraphs (a) and (b) is limited to circumstances when it passes from a native American to one or more relatives, including native Americans not enrolled as members of a tribe and non-native Americans such as a spouse and step-children, that their culture would nevertheless protect as family members; to a tribe or tribal organization; or to one or more native Americans;

 (c) income left as a remainder in an estate derived from property protected in Paragraph (2) above, that was either collected by a native American, or by a tribe or tribal organization and distributed to native Americans that the individual can clearly trace the income as coming from the protected property;

 (d) ownership interests left as a remainder in an estate in rents, leases, royalties, or usage rights related to natural resources resulting from the exercise of federally-protected rights, and income either collected by a native American, or by a tribe or tribal organization and distributed to native Americans derived from these sources as long as the individual can clearly trace the ownership interest as coming from protected sources; and

 (e) ownership interest in or usage of rights to items, not covered by Subparagraphs (a) through (d) above, that have unique religious, spiritual, traditional, or cultural significance or rights that support subsistence or a traditional lifestyle according to applicable tribal law or custom.

 (3) Effective July 1, 2024, the HCA does not seek payment from an achieving a better life experience (ABLE) account or its proceeds for medicaid benefits provided to the beneficiary of the account.

 D. 
 Recovery process: Recovery from an eligible recipient's estate will be made only after the death of the eligible recipient's surviving spouse, if any, and only at a time that the eligible recipient does not have surviving child who is less than 21 years of age, blind, or who meet the SSA definition of disability. (1) Estate recovery is limited to payments for applicable services received on or after October 1, 1993; except that recovery also is permitted for pre-October 1993 payments for nursing facility services received by a MAP recipient who was 65 years of age or older when such nursing facility services were received.

 (2) A recovery notice will be mailed to the authorized representative or next of kin upon the eligible recipient's death informing them about the amount of claim against the estate and provide information on hardship waivers and hearing rights.

 (3) It is the family or authorized representative's responsibility to report the eligible recipient's date of death to the ISD office within 10 calendar days after the date of death.

 E. 
 Eligible recipient rights and responsibilities: 
 (1) At the time of application or re-certification, the authorized representative must be identified or confirmed by the applicant or eligible recipient or their designee.

 (2) Information explaining estate recovery will be furnished to the applicant or eligible recipient, their personal representative, or designee during the application or re-certification process. Upon the death of the MAP eligible recipient, a notice of intent to collect (recovery) letter will be mailed to the eligible recipient's personal representative with the total amount of claims paid by MAD on behalf of the eligible recipient. The authorized representative must acknowledge receipt of this letter in the manner prescribed in the letter within 30 calendar days of the date on the letter.

 (3) During the application or re-certification process for] MAP eligibility, the local county ISD office will identify the assets of an applicant or the eligible recipient. This includes all real and personal property which belongs in whole or in part to the applicant or eligible recipient and the current fair market value of each asset. Any known encumbrances on the asset should be identified at this time by the applicant or the eligible recipient or their authorized representative.

 (4) MAD, or its designee, will send notice of recovery to the probate court, when applicable, and to the eligible recipient's authorized representative or successor in interest. The notice will contain the following information: (a) statement describing the action MAD, or its designee, intends to take;

 (b) reasons for the intended action;

 (c) statutory authority for the action;

 (d) amount to be recovered;

 (e) opportunity to apply for the undue hardship waiver ;

 (f) procedures for applying for a hardship waiver and the relevant timeframes involved;

 (g) explanation of the eligible recipient's personal representative's right to request a HCA administrative hearing; and

 (h) the method by which an affected person may obtain a HCA administrative hearing and the applicable timeframes involved.

 (5) Once notified by MAD, or its designee, of the decision to seek recovery, it is the responsibility of the eligible recipient's authorized representative or successor in interest to notify other individuals who would be affected by the proposed recovery.

 (6) The authorized representative will: (a) remit the amount of medical assistance payments to HCA or its designee;

 (b) apply for an undue hardship waiver ; (see Paragraph (2) of Subsection F below); or

 (c) request an administrative hearing.

 F. 
 Waivers: 
 (1) For a general waiver , HCA may compromise, settle, or waive recovery pursuant to the Medicaid Estate Recovery Act if it deems that such action is in the best interest of the state or federal government.

 (2) Hardship provision: HCA, or its designee, may waive recovery because recovery would work an undue hardship on the heirs. The following are deemed to be causes for hardship: (a) the deceased recipient's heir would become eligible for a needs-based assistance program such as medicaid or temporary assistance to needy families ( TANF ) or be put at risk of serious deprivation without the receipt of the proceeds of the estate;

 (b) the deceased eligible recipient's heir would be able to discontinue reliance on a needs-based program (such as medicaid or TANF ) if they received the inheritance from the estate;

 (c) the deceased recipient's assets which are subject to recovery are the sole income source for the heir;

 (d) the homestead is worth 50 percent or less than the average price of a home in the county where the home is located based on census data compared to the property tax value of the home ; or

 (e) there are other compelling circumstances as determined by HCA or its designee.

 Notes

 N.M. Admin. Code §
 8.200.430.19 

 8.200.430.19 NMAC - N, 1-1-14, Amended by New Mexico Register, Volume XXV, Issue 19, October 15, 2014 , eff. 10/15/2014 , Amended by New Mexico Register, Volume XXXV, Issue 20, October 22, 2024 , eff. 11/1/2024 

 State regulations are updated quarterly; we currently have two versions available.
 Below is a comparison between our most recent version and the prior quarterly release. 
 More comparison features will be added as we have more versions to compare.

 No prior version found.

 State Regulations Toolbox

 about 

 Accessibility 

 About LII 

 Contact us 

 Advertise here 

 Help 

 Terms of use 

 Privacy
