Source URL: https://codes.findlaw.com/nm/chapter-27-public-assistance/nm-st-sect-27-2a-4.html ; https://codes.findlaw.com/nm/chapter-27-public-assistance/nm-st-sect-27-2a-5.html ; https://codes.findlaw.com/nm/chapter-27-public-assistance/nm-st-sect-27-2a-7.html
Retrieved: 2026-09-23
Note: WebFetch extraction, not verbatim. Official sites returned HTTP 403. FindLaw marks each "Current as of January 01, 2024".

Sec. 27-2A-4. Department to seek recovery of medical assistance payments; restriction
A. The department shall seek recovery from the estate of an individual:
(1) for medical assistance paid on behalf of an individual who was an inpatient in a nursing facility, intermediate care facility for individuals with developmental or intellectual disabilities or other medical institution if the individual was required, as a condition of receiving services in the facility or institution pursuant to the state plan, to spend for costs of services all but a minimal amount of the individual's income required for personal needs, and with respect to whom the department determined, after opportunity for a hearing in accordance with procedures established by the department, could not reasonably have been expected to have been discharged from the facility or institution to return home; and
(2) for medical assistance payments made for nursing facility services, home- and community-based services and related hospital and prescription drug services on behalf of an individual who was fifty-five years of age or older when the individual received medical assistance.
B. In the case of an individual who has participated in the state's qualified state long-term care insurance partnership program pursuant to Section 27-2-12.17 NMSA 1978, the department shall seek recovery of medical assistance paid on behalf of the individual only of the value of the individual's estate that exceeds the amount that the department has disregarded from the individual's countable resources pursuant to Paragraph (2) of Subsection A of Section 27-2-12.17 NMSA 1978 in making its eligibility determination for medical assistance for institutional care or a medical assistance home- and community-based long-term care program.

Sec. 27-2A-5.
A. The department shall administer the estate recovery program.
B. The department shall adopt and promulgate rules and regulations to implement the provisions of the Medicaid Estate Recovery Act.
C. The department may compromise, settle or waive recovery pursuant to the Medicaid Estate Recovery Act when deemed by the department to be in the best interests of the state.

Sec. 27-2A-7.
Any recovery from an estate may be made only after the death of the decedent's surviving spouse, if any, and only at a time when the decedent has no surviving child who is less than twenty-one years of age or is blind or disabled as defined in 42 U.S.C. 1383C.
