Source URL: https://web.archive.org/web/20160818154802/http://law.justia.com/codes/new-mexico/2006/nmrc/jd_45-6-401-fda9.html
Retrieved: 2026-09-23

45-6-401 - Real property; transfer on death deed. :: Article 6 - Nonprobate Transfers, 45-6-101 through 45-6-401. :: Chapter 45 - Uniform Probate Code. :: 2006 New Mexico Statutes :: New Mexico Statutes :: US Codes and Statutes :: US Law :: Justia 

 Log In 
 Sign Up 

 Find a Lawyer 

 Ask a Lawyer 

 Research the Law 

 Law Schools 

 Laws & Regs 

 Newsletters 

 Legal Marketing 

 Justia US Law US Codes and Statutes New Mexico Statutes 2006 New Mexico Statutes Chapter 45 - Uniform Probate Code. Article 6 - Nonprobate Transfers, 45-6-101 through 45-6-401. 45-6-401 - Real property; transfer on death deed. 

 View the 2015 New Mexico Statutes 
 |
 View Previous Versions of the New Mexico Statutes 

 2006 New Mexico Statutes - 45-6-401 - Real property; transfer on death deed.

 45-6-401. Real property; transfer on death deed. 
 A.     An interest in real property may be titled in transfer on death form by recording a deed signed and acknowledged by the record owner of the interest and designating a grantee beneficiary or beneficiaries of the interest. The deed transfers ownership of that interest upon the death of the owner. A transfer on death deed need not be supported by consideration.    
 B.     The signature, consent or agreement of or notice to a grantee beneficiary of a transfer on death deed is not required for any purpose during the lifetime of the record owner.        C.  An interest in real property is titled in transfer on death form by executing, acknowledging and recording in the office of the county clerk in the county where the real property is located, prior to the death of the owner, a deed in substantially the following form:  

 "TRANSFER ON DEATH DEED     ........ (Name of owner)  ........ as owner transfers on death to  .... (name of beneficiary)  ...., as grantee beneficiary, the following described interest in real property. THIS TRANSFER ON DEATH DEED IS REVOCABLE. IT DOES NOT TRANSFER ANY OWNERSHIP UNTIL THE DEATH OF THE OWNER. IT REVOKES ALL PRIOR BENEFICIARY DESIGNATIONS BY THIS OWNER FOR THIS INTEREST IN REAL PROPERTY.  

 (description)  
 Witness  ............ hand  ............ and 
 seal  ............ this  ...... day of 20  ... ............ (Seal) 
 (Here add acknowledgment(s))". 
 D.     A designation of the grantee beneficiary may be revoked by the record owner at any time prior to the death of the record owner, by the record owner executing, acknowledging and recording in the office of the county clerk in the county where the real property is located an instrument describing the interest and revoking the designation. The signature, consent or agreement of or notice to the grantee beneficiary or beneficiaries is not required.    
 E.     A designation of the grantee beneficiary may be changed by the record owner at any time prior to the death of the record owner, by the record owner executing, acknowledging and recording a subsequent transfer on death deed. The signature, consent or agreement of or notice to the grantee beneficiary or beneficiaries is not required. A subsequent transfer on death beneficiary designation revokes a prior designation to the extent there is a conflict between the two designations.    
 F.     A transfer on death deed executed, acknowledged and recorded in accordance with this section is not revoked by the provisions of a will.    
 G.     A joint tenancy in real property is not effected [affected] by a transfer on death deed, and the rights of a surviving joint tenant shall prevail over a grantee beneficiary named in a transfer on death deed. If a joint tenant has executed a transfer on death deed, and if that joint tenant is the last surviving joint tenant, then the transfer on death deed is effective on that joint tenant's death.    
 H.     Title to the interest in real estate recorded in transfer on death form shall vest in the designated grantee beneficiary or beneficiaries on the death of the record owner.    
 I.     Grantee beneficiaries of a transfer on death deed take the record owner's interest in the real estate at death subject to all conveyances, assignments, contracts, mortgages, liens and security pledges made by the record owner or to which the record owner was subject during the record owner's lifetime and to any interest conveyed by the record owner that is less than all of the record owner's interest in the property.    
 J.     If the assets of the estate are insufficient, a transfer resulting from a transfer on death deed is not effective against the estate of a deceased party to the extent needed to pay any claims against the estate and the statutory allowances to the surviving spouse and children.    
 K.     If a grantee beneficiary dies prior to the death of the record owner and an alternative grantee beneficiary has not been designated on the deed, the transfer shall lapse.   

 Disclaimer: These codes may not be the most recent version. New Mexico may have more current or accurate information. We make no warranties or guarantees about the accuracy, completeness, or adequacy of the information contained on this site or the information linked to on the state site. Please check official sources.

 Ask a Lawyer 

 Question: 

 Add details 

 120

 Additional Details: 

 1000 

 Ask Question 

 Subscribe to Justia's 

 Free Newsletters

 featuring summaries of federal and state 

 court opinions . 

 Subscribe Now

 Find a Lawyer 

 Lawyers - Get Listed Now! 

 Get a free directory profile listing 

 Justia Legal Resources

 Find a Lawyer 

 Bankruptcy Lawyers 

 Business Lawyers 

 Criminal Lawyers 

 Employment Lawyers 

 Estate Planning Lawyers 

 Family Lawyers 

 Personal Injury Lawyers 

 More... 

 Individuals 

 Bankruptcy 

 Criminal 

 Divorce 

 DUI 

 Estate Planning 

 Family Law 

 Personal Injury 

 More... 

 Business 

 Business Formation 

 Business Operations 

 Employment 

 Intellectual Property 

 International Trade 

 Real Estate 

 Tax Law 

 More... 

 Law Students 

 Law Schools 

 Admissions 

 Financial Aid 

 Course Outlines 

 Law Journals 

 Blogs 

 Employment 

 More... 

 US Federal Law 

 US Constitution 

 US Code 

 Regulations 

 Supreme Court 

 Circuit Courts 

 District Courts 

 Dockets & Filings 

 More... 

 US State Law 

 State Constitutions 

 State Codes 

 State Case Law 

 California 

 Florida 

 New York 

 Texas 

 More... 

 Other Databases 

 Legal Blogs 

 Legal Forms 

 GAO Reports 

 Product Recalls 

 Patents 

 Trademarks 

 Countries 

 More... 

 Legal Marketing 

 Websites 

 Blogs 

 Content 

 Social Media 

 Local Marketing 

 Paid Ads (CPC/PPC) 

 Lawyer Directory 

 More... 

 © 2016 Justia 

 Company 
 Terms of Service 
 Privacy Policy 
 Contact Us
