Source URL: https://web.archive.org/web/20250201205727id_/https://dhcfp.nv.gov/uploadedFiles/dhcfpnvgov/content/Providers/PI/MOM%20Chapter%20800.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-09-23

                                                                                     MTL 02/19
                                                                      Section:
 DIVISION OF HEALTH CARE FINANCING AND POLICY                                            800

                                                                      Subject:
MEDICAID OPERATIONAL MANUAL                                                      INTRODUCTION


800         INTRODUCTION

            Cost Savings Programs arc considered measures or actions that lower current spending such as
            recouping paid funds from liable third party/parties. Medicaid Estate Recovery (MER) and
            Subrogation - Third Party Liability (TPL) and probate duties are considered to be measurable
            actions to cost savings.

800.1       Federal and state law mandates state operation of the MER program whereby correctly paid
            Medicaid benefits are recoverable from the estate of a deceased Medicaid recipient. Recovery is
            accomplished only after the death of a recipient and at a time when there is no surviving spouse,
            children under the age of 21, or blind or disabled children of any age, as defined by Section 1614
            of the Social Security Act (SSA).

            Regulations of the MER program affects individuals who received Medicaid benefits on or after
            October I, 1993. Collections will be pursued against the estate of the recipient up to the amount of
            Medicaid benefits correctly paid or up to the determined value of the recipient's estate whichever
            is less.

            MER staff are located at the Division of Health Care Financing and Policy (DHCFP), 1100 E.
            William St. Suite 109, Carson City Nevada 89701; Phone (775) 687-8414 and Fax (775) 684-3720;
            mer@dhcfp.nv.gov.

800.2       In certain trauma situations, there may be a source of medical payments other than regular health
            insurance. This source could be through automobile insurance. homeowner·s insurance. liability
            insurance, etc. A provider may elect to bill or file a lien against those sources, or Medicaid may be
            billed.

            Under 3 I Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) 50.104, an insurer shall not waive its rights of
            subrogation under its property and casualty insurance policy concerning any losses the payment
            of which the insurer intends to include in its insurer deductible or the aggregate insured losses for
            purposes of calculating the Federal share of compensation of its insured losses. As a representation
            of theory and interpretation behind insurance subrogation, Nevada Medicaid will allow providers
            who accept(ed) a Medicaid payment for services directly related to injuries or accidents to
                                                                                                     r
            subsequently return that payment to Medicaid in order to seek reimbursement directly fom     a liable
            third party.

            Subrogation casualty case recoupment is the collaborative work between the DHCFP, States Fiscal
            Agent and TPL vendor. Managed Care Organizations (MCOs) and the Dental Benefit
            Administrator arc required to pursue their enrollees subrogation cases and to provide reports
            outlined in the Medicaid Service Manual (MSM) and their contract requirements.




  December 28, 2018                  COST SAVINGS PROGRAM                               Section 800 Pa e I
                                                                                MTLo02/19
                                                                  Section:
DIVISION OF HEALTH CARE FINANCING AND POLICY                                        801

                                                                  Subject:
MEDICAID OPERATION AL MANUAL                                                  AUTHORITY


801        AUTHORITY

           Authority for operating the MER program is published in Section 1917 of the SSA and Nevada
           Revised Statutes (NRS) 422.054; 422.29301; 42229302; and et.seq.

           Sections I 902(a)(25), 1912 and 1917 allows States the ability to recover the cost from the full
           amount of a liability settlement, instead of a portion of the settlement.

           31 CFR 50.105 Subrogation

           42 CFR, Part 433, Subpart D, 42 CFR 433.145, 433. I 46(c) and 433.154

           State Medicaid Manual (SMM) 3905.2 and 3908

           NRS 422.293 Subrogation, Rights and Responsibilities

           Nevada Medicaid State Plan Section 4.22; Third Party Liability, Attachment 4.22-B

           Worker's compensation insurance coverage is required for all providers pursuant to NRS
           Chapters 616A through 6168.




 December 28, 2018                 COST SA VJNGS PROGRAM                           Section 80 I Pa e I
                                                                                          MTL 02/19
                                                                           Section:
 DIVISION OF HEALTH CARE FINANCING AND POLICY                                                 802

                                                                           Subject:
 MEDICAID OPERATIONAL MANUAL                                                            DEFINITIONS


802          DEFINITIONS

802.ol       AFFECTED INDIVIDUALS

             MER actions are imposed against Medicaid recipients who are:

             •         Fifty-five years of age or older when they receive Medicaid assistance; or

             •         An inpatient in a nursing facility, intermediate care facility for individuals with intellectual
                       disabilities (ICF/lID) or other medical institution, where they are required to spend for
                       costs of medical care all but a minimal amount of income which is permitted for the
                       recipient's personal needs.

802.2        ESTATE

             For the purposes of MER, '·Estate" means assets included in the estate of the deceased recipient of
             assistance to the medically indigent and any other assets in or to which the recipient had an interest
             or legal title immediately before or at the time of death, to the extent of that interest or title (NRS
             422.054). The term includes assets passing by reason of joint tenancy, reserved life estate,
             survivorship, trust, annuity, homestead or other arrangement.

802.3        PRO BATE

             The legal process by which the assets of a decedent are properly distributed (if he or she made a
             will) to the beneficiaries or heirs through an executor named in the will, or (if he or she died
             without a will) according to the local law by a court-appointed administrator. The coUit's objective
             is to ensure that the deceased's debts, taxes and other valid claims are paid out of his or her estate
             (probate assets) before any distribution is made to the estate's beneficiaries, in accordance with the
             will (if it exists) or on the orders of the coutt (if it doesn't exist).

802.4        DEPUTY ATTORNEY GENERAL (DAG)

             The DHCFP works directly with the Deputy Attorney General(s) (DAG) for complex case
             decisions and guidance.

802. 5       CASUALTY LIEN REDUCTION

             For the purpose of TPL, casualty is the result of an accident, mishap or disaster. The result of
             casualty may lead to entering a lien; a right to keep possession of prope1ty or a form of cash
             settlement, belonging to another person until a debt owed is negotiated, paid at the level of cost
             accrued or discharged.




  December 28, 20I 8                     COST SAVINGS PROGRAM                                 Section 802 Pa e I
                                                                                       MTL 02/19
                                                                         Section:
 DNISION OF HEALTH CARE FINANCING AND POLICY                                                802

                                                                         Subject:
 MEDICAID OPERATIONAL MANUAL                                                         DEFINITIONS


802.6         SUBROGATION

              Subrogation refers to an insurer· s right to recover the amount it has paid for a loss from the party
              that caused the loss.




  December 28, 20 I 8                  COST SA VINOS PROGRAM                               Section 802 Pa e 2
                                                                                       MTL02/l9
                                                                        Section:
 DIVISION OF HEALTH CARE FINANCING AND POLICY                                              803

                                                                        Subject:
 MEDICAID OPERATIONAL MANUAL                                                         MER POLICY


803          MER POLICY

803.1       NOTIFICATION TO AFFECTED INDIVIDUALS

            Full disclosure of the MER program operation is made during the application process. Statements
            regarding MER are included on the eligibility application and applicants (or their representatives)
            are given Form 6160-AF, "Medicaid Estate Recovery Notification of Program Operation." Staff
            MUST attempt to secure the acknowledgment (via signature) of information provided on Fonn
            6160-AF. However, the applicant's (or their representative's) failure to sign the form does not
            preclude the pursuit of correctly paid benefits.

            Form 6160-AF, Medicaid Estate Recovery Notification of Program Operation, must be given to
            all applicants for Medicaid assistance at the time of application for services and redetermination.
            Provide the applicant the form in English or Spanish, whichever is appropriate.

            One copy of the form will be given to the applicant and one dated copy will be filed in the Medicaid
            eligibility case file.

803.2        REFERRAL CASES TO MER UNIT

            When a MER affected recipient is no longer Medicaid eligible due to death, the eligibility worker
            MUST forward their case file to MER within three working days after the closure of the Medicaid
            case file resulting from the death of the Medicaid recipient.

            Eligibility staff will request in writing the return of the case file, if necessary. The written request
            must include the name and Social Security Number of the client; the date of the request; the
            eligibility staff member requesting the file and the district office where the file should be sent. This
            request may be faxed or forwarded to Attention: MER, utilizing interoffice mail. MER staff will
            provide the case file within three working days.

            Case files for Medicaid applicants who have been denied Medicaid eligibility and who do not have
            a history of prior approval should not be forwarded to the MER unit.

803.3       INITIATION OF MER ACTIVITIES

            Upon receipt of the closed Medicaid eligibility case file, MER personnel will establish a MER
            recovery case. MER staff will validate the recipient's reported resource information.

803.4       NOTIFICATION OF RECIPIENT'S HEIRS

            When MER staff receives notification of an affected Medicaid recipient's death, they will provide
            their known heirs with a written notice which:



  December 28, 2018                  COST SA VINOS PROGRAM                                Section 803 Pa e I
                                                                                        MTL 02/19
                                                                         Section:
DIVISION OF HEALTH CARE FINANCING AND POLICY                                                803

                                                                         Subject:
MEDICAID OPERATIONAL MANUAL                                                           MER POLICY


            A.        Advises of the State's intent to recover the value of Medicaid benefits paid on the recipient's
                      behalf from the recipient's estate; and

            B.        Provides information addressing Medicaid payments made on behalf of the recipient; and

            C.        Includes a statement advising the amount the MER claim may increase if there are additional
                      Medicaid claims which have not yet been processed.

            All MER notices will include a statement advising the recipient's heirs of the MER hardship waiver
            prov1s10ns.

803.5       IDENTIFICATION OF MER COLLECTIBLES

            After the reported death of an affected recipient, MER personnel will review the recipient's estate
            to determine an estimated dollar value. Assets information will be recorded in the recipient's MER
            file and will serve as the maximum amount recoverable under the MER program.

            MER actions will be pw·sued against the estate of the recipient up to the amount of Medicaid
            benefits correctly paid or up to the determined value of the recipient's estate whichever is less.

803.6       INITIATING MER COLLECTIONS

            After the recipient's death, MER personnel will immediately pursue adjustments or recovery of
            any Medicaid assistance correctly paid on behalf of the recipient from the recipient's estate or
            upon the sale of the recipient's real property.

            Any adjustment or recovery against a recipient may be made only after the death of the recipient's
            surviving spouse, if any, and only at a time when:

            A.        The recipient has no surviving child who is under 21 years of age; or

            B.        The recipient has no surviving child who is blind or disabled, of any age, as defined by
                      Section 1614 of the SSA.

803.7       RECOVERY AGAINST AN ESTATE

            After the death of an affected recipient, and in accordance with NRS, MER personnel will
            immediately file a claim against the estate of the recipient for the full value of Medicaid benefits
            paid on behalf of the recipient. Once MER staff has requested the deceased recipient's case file,
            eligibility staff will forward the case file to MER within three working days.

            Claims will be filed with:



  December 28, 2018                    COST SAVINGS PROGRAM                                Section 803 Pa e 2
                                                                                      MTL 02/19
                                                                        Section:
 DIVISION OF HEALTH CARE FINANCING AND POLICY                                             803

                                                                        Subject:
 MEDICAID OPERATIONAL MANUAL                                                        MER POLICY


             A.       The court having jurisdiction over the recipient's estate pursuant to NRS 147.040; or

             B.       Any individual or entity empowered with the legal ability to control, liquidate or transfer
                      any part of the recipient's estate.

803.8        IMPOSITION OF LIENS

             Liens may be imposed to protect recovery of estate assets for correctly paid Medicaid benefits
             when permitted by federal and state law. The purpose of the lien is to facilitate recovery of
             Medicaid benefits when it is appropriate and allowable by law to do so. It is not intended to impair
             the ability of the surviving spouse or another qualified individual to sell or refinance the property
             if so desired, nor is it intended to force the premature sale of the property. Action is never taken
             on liens until or unless all exemptions allowed by federal law no longer apply.

             The State's lien would only be against the interest in that property the Medicaid recipient had at
             the time of death or the Medicaid claim, whichever is less.

            Federal law prohibits recovery on a lien when there is a surviving spouse, children under the age
            of 21, or blind and/or disabled children of any age. The State must release a lien if a surviving
            spouse, a child under age 21 or blind or disabled child of any age, as defined by Section I 614 of
            the SSA, or a legal representative desire to engage in a bona fide sale or financial transaction
            involving the property. If the property is refinanced, the State has the option of re-petitioning for
            the placement of the lien.

             In the event of incorrectly paid benefits, a lien may be imposed on both real and personal property
             with authority of a court judgment without regard to circumstances.

803.9       POSTPONING/TERMINATING MER ACTIONS

            If, after the reported death of the recipient, immediate MER action is prohibited because of
            exception conditions, MER personnel postpone MER action until all exception conditions are no
            longer present. Termination of MER action will occur when all real and personal property included
            as part of the recipient's estate is no longer accessible.

803.10      RECEIPTING/POSTING MER COLLECTIONS

            All MER collections will be received by MER personnel located at the DHCFP.

            Payment may be made by check, money order or wire transfer, made payable to Medicaid Estate
            Recovery, Department of Health and Human Services, or Nevada State Treasurer. MER does not
            accept cash or credit card as a form of payment

            Do not state verbally or in writing that this payment releases the heir from MER action.


  December 28, 2018                    COST SAVINGS PROGRAM                              Section 803 Pa e 3
                                                                                        MTL 02/19
                                                                         Section:
DIVISION OF HEALTH CARE FINANCING AND POLICY                                                803

                                                                         Subject:
 MEDICAID OPERATIONAL MANUAL                                                          MER POLICY


803.11      EXCLUSION FROM RECOVERY

            A.        The following income, resources and property are exempt from MER:

                      1.    Certain income and resources of American Indians and Alaska Natives. Income and
                            resources (such as interests in and income derived from tribal land and other
                            resources cunently held in trust status and judgment funds from the Indian Claims
                            Commission and the U.S. Claims Court) that are exempt from Medicaid estate
                            recovery by other laws and regulations;

                      2.     Ownership interest in trust or non-trust property, including real property and
                             improvements:

                            a.      Located on a reservation (any federally recognized Indian tribal reservation,
                                    Pueblo or Colony, including former reservations in Oklahoma, Alaska
                                    Native regions established by Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act and
                                    Indian allotment) or near a reservation as designated and approved by the
                                    Bureau of Indian Affairs of the U.S. Department of the Interior; or

                             b.      For any federally-recognized tribe not described in (a) located within the
                                     most recent boundaries of a prior federal reservation.

                             c.      Protection of non-ttust property described above is limited to circumstances
                                     when it passes from an Indian (as defined in Section 4 of the Indian Health
                                     Care Improvement Act) to one or more relatives (by blood, adoption or
                                     maniage) including Indians not enrolled as members of a tribe and non­
                                     Indians, such as spouses and stepchildren; that their culture would
                                     nevertheless protect as family members, to a tribe or tribal organization;
                                     and/or to one or more Indians.

                      3.     Income left as a remainder in an estate derived from prope11y protected in (b) above
                             that was either collected by an Indian, or by a tribe or tribal organization and
                             distributed to lndian(s), as long as the individual can clearly trace it as coming from
                             the protected property;

                      4.     Ownership interests left as a remainder in an estate in rents, leases, royalties or
                             usage rights related to natural resources (including extraction of natural resources
                             or harvesting of timber, other plants and plant products, animals, fish and shellfish)
                             resulting from the exercise of federally-protected rights, and income either
                             collected by an Indian, or by a tribe or ttibal organization and distributed to
                             lndian(s) derived from these sources as long as the individual can clearly trace it as
                             coming from protected sources; and



  December 28, 2018                    COST SAVINGS PROGRAM                                Section 803 Pa e 4
                                                                                       MTL 02/19
                                                                        Section:
 DIVISION OF HEALTH CARE FINANCING AND POLICY                                              803

                                                                        Subject:
 MEDICAID OPERATIONAL MANUAL                                                         MER POLICY


                      5.     Ownership interest in or usage rights to items not covered by I - 4 above that have
                             unique religious, spiritual, traditional and/or cultural significance or rights that
                             support subsistence or a traditional and/or cultural significance, or rights that
                             support subsistence or a traditional lifestyle according to applicable tribal law or
                             custom;

                      6.     Government reparation payments to special populations.

            B.        Income, resources and property of American Indians and Alaska Natives, which are not
                      exempt from Medicaid estate recovery:

                      1.     Ownership interests in assets and property, both real and personal, that are not
                             described in the above items.

                      2.     Any income and assets left as a remainder in an estate that does not derive from
                             protected property or sources listed above.

803.1 2     HARDSHIP WAIYER

            At the time recovery is initiated, the MER recovery specialist will discuss hardship waivers,
            compromises or adjustments to the State's claim. Hardship requests will be submitted to the
            administrator or their appointed representative of the DHCFP for review. The denial of a hardship
            waiver may be appealed through an administrative hearing.

            There is no hardship waiver provided at the time of lien placement against the real property of a
            deceased Medicaid recipient. The equity interest of the heir will be considered to determine the
            percentage of the deceased recipient's interest in the property. Lien placement is utilized to delay
            recovery until such time an exemption to recovery does not exist, or in the case of a hardship, until
            such time as the hardship no longer exists. The State's lien would be the Medicaid benefits paid
            on behalf of the recipient or the percentage of interest of the deceased recipient at the time of sale,
            whichever is less.

803.1 3      HARDSHIP WAIYER CRITERIA

            The State will waive enforcement of any estate recovery claim when the requesting party is able
            to show, through convincing evidence, the State's pursuit of estate recovery subjects them to undue
            hardship. A claim for emotional hardship is not considered sufficient to warrant waiver approval.
            No waiver will be granted if the Division finds the undue hardship was created by estate planning
            methods by which the waiver applicant or deceased client divested, transferred or otherwise
            encumbered assets in whole or part, to avoid estate recovery. In determining whether undue
            hardship exists, the following criteria will be used:

             A.       The asset to be recovered is the sole income-producing asset of the applicant; or


  December 28, 2018                    COST SAVINGS PROGRAM                               Section 803 Pa e 5
                                                                                       MTL 02/ 1 9
                                                                         Section:
DIVISION OF HEALTH CARE FINANCING AND POLICY                                               803

                                                                         Subject:
MEDICAID OPERATIONAL MANUAL                                                          MER POLICY


             B.        The recovery of the assets would result in the applicant becoming eligible for governmental
                       public assistance based on need and/or medical assistance programs; or

             C.        A doctor's written verification of a medical condition that compromises the applicant's
                       ability to repay the Medicaid claim.

             If an undue hardship waiver is requested and the State determines that none of the above conditions
             apply, full payment of the claim may be ordered, recovery may be temporarily waived,
             compromised or modified. The following factors shall be considered individually or in
             combination when making a decision to temporarily waive, modify or compromise estate recovery:

             D.        The gross annual income, prope11y and other assets of the applicant and their immediate
                       family;

             E.        The type and level of care provided by the applicant (caregiver) to the decedent and the
                       extent to which the care delayed or prevented the institutionalization of the decedent. The
                       State uses the following process for determining if the applicants will be considered as
                       caregivers when through clear evidence they substantiate;

                       I.     Maintained residency in the Medicaid recipient's home for at least two years
                              immediately preceding the recipient's death or admission into a nursing facility,
                              ICF/IID or other medical institutions; and

                       2.     Provided care for Medicaid recipient which meets or exceeds published state
                              standard established for Intermediate Care Level (ICL 1 ), which includes as
                              necessary, assisting the individual with ambulatory needs, feeding, grooming,
                              personal hygiene, oral hygiene, nail care, bathing, toilet activities, skin care and
                              medical needs.

                       3.     The applicant continuously resided with the decedent for two years or more
                              immediately prior to the decedent's death and continues to reside in the decedent's
                              residence and the prior occupancy permitted the decedent to reside at home rather
                              than in an institution;

                       4.     The estimated value of the real or personal property at issue. If the cost of
                              recovering the asset(s) of the deceased Medicaid recipient is more than the value of
                              the asset(s), it would not be cost-effective to recover, and/or

                       5.     The financial impact of recovery against immediate family members of the
                              applicant.

                       6.     Applicants who seek a recovery delay (i.e., temporary waiver) will be given the
                              oppo11unity to provide written details or complete an "Application for a Hardship


 December 28, 20 1 8                    COST SA VfNGS PROGRAM                             Section 803 Pa e 6
                                                                                        MTL 02/19
                                                                        Section:
 DIVISION OF HEALTH CARE FINANCING AND POLICY                                              803

                                                                        Subject:
 MEDICAID OPERATIONAL MANUAL                                                        MER POLICY


                             Waiver Regarding Recovery of Correctly Paid Medicaid Benefits" form within 30
                             days of notification of the Division's intent to recover.

             F.        The following collection methods may be used when recovery is temporarily waived,
                       compromised or modified:

                       1.    Reduction of recovery amount;

                       2.    Reasonable payment schedule based on the asset to be recovered; and/or

                       3.    Where not prohibited by law, the imposition of a lien against the assets of the
                             deceased Medicaid recipient.

                             a.     Before the imposition of a lien, the Division shall notify all persons having
                                    an interest in the estate of the deceased Medicaid recipient and petition the
                                    appropriate district court for the imposition of a lien per NRS 422.29306.

                             b.     If a lien is placed on an individual's home, adjustment or recovery will only
                                    be made when:

                                    1.      There is no surviving spouse;

                                    2.      There is no child under the age of 21; or

                                    3.      There is no blind or disabled (as defined in Section 161 4 of the SSA)
                                            child of the Medicaid recipient.

                             c.     The lien will become due and payable upon the sale, refinance, transfer or
                                    change in title to the real property; and/or escrow funding, but only when
                                    there is no surviving spouse, children under 21 , or blind or disabled
                                    children, of any age, as defined by Section 1614 of the SSA of the Medicaid
                                    recipient. Recovery is limited to the Medicaid recipient's interest in the
                                    property at the time of claim payment not to exceed the Medicaid claim or
                                    the percentage of interest of the Medicaid recipient in the asset.

                             d.     Upon payment of the claim, or need of the statutory exemptions, the
                                    division will prepare a release of lien or subordinate the lien. This release
                                    will be provided to the appropriate entity; such as, an escrow company or
                                    the county recorder's office.

803. 1 4     PROCEDURES FOR APPLYING FOR HARDSHIP WAIYER

             Federal law prohibits recovery during the lifetime of a spouse and/or when there are children under
             the a e of 2 1 , and/or when there are children who are blind and/or disabled.

  December 28, 201o8                     COST SA VlNGS PROGRAM                            Section 803 Pa e 7
                                                                                     MTL 02/19
                                                                       Section:
DNISION OF HEALTH CARE FINANCING AND POLICY                                              803

                                                                       Subject:
MEDICAID OPERATIONAL MANUAL                                                        MER POLICY


           A.        The State defines undue hardship as severe financial duress or a significant compromise to
                     an individual's health care or shelter needs.

                     Application for Undue Hardship Waiver - Any heir or survivor may seek an undue
                     hardship waiver by submitting a written request for a waiver by completing an ''Application
                     (Request) for a Hardship Waiver Regarding Recovery of Correctly Paid Medicaid
                     Benefits" form within 30 days of notification of the Division's intent to recover.
                     Documentary evidence that supports the applicant's claim should be attached. The written
                     decision of the Administrator of the DHCFP will be provided to the applicant 90 days from
                     receipt of the request.

           B.        The following time frames are used by the State in considering the waiving of estate
                     recoveries:

                     l.     Any beneficiary, heir or family member claiming entitlement to receive the assets
                            of the deceased Medicaid recipient may apply for a hardship waiver by submitting
                            a written request for a waiver within 30 days of being notified of intent to recover
                            to the MER unit.

                     2.     The Division may request additional info1mation or documentation from the waiver
                            applicant. If some or all the additional infom1ation or documentation is not provided
                            within 30 days of the request, the hardship waiver request will be considered solely
                            on the basis of the information and documentation provided.

                     3.     Within 90 days of receipt of the undue hardship waiver request, the Division
                            Administrator or his appointed representative, will issue a written decision granting
                            or denying the applicant's request for an undue hardship waiver.




 December 28, 2018                    COST SA VIN GS PROGRAM                             Section 803 Pa e 8
                                                                                         MTL 02/19
                                                                          Section:
DIVISION OF HEALTH CARE FINANCING AND POLICY                                                 804

                                                                          Subject:
MEDICAID OPERATIONAL MANUAL                                                SUBROGATION - THIRD PARTY
                                                                                   LIABILITY

804         SUBROGATIONo- THIRD PARTY LIABILITY

804.1       PROVIDERS - CASUALTY LIEN REDUCTIONS

            Nevada Medicaid will allow providers who accept(ed) a Medicaid payment for services directly
            related to injuries or accidents to subsequently return that payment to Medicaid in order to seek
            reimbursement directly from a liable third party.

             A.       Medicaid will not enter into an arrangement with providers to represent or act on behalf of
                      Medicaid in pursuit of recovery. Medicaid will continue to utilize its own legal staff to
                      pursue recovery.

             B.       Medicaid will pursue its own liens against tort settlements/judgments for those payments
                      made by Medicaid to providers who do not repay them to pursue liens of their own.
                      Although one provider may return a payment and pursue its own lien, other(s) may choose
                      to accept Medicaid's payment in full. In these latter situations, Medicaid will pursue its
                      own liens through established subrogation policies. However, the amount of Medicaid's
                      lien will be limited to the total amount of all payments made by Medicaid which were not
                      repaid by providers.

             C.       Providers have the option to pursue liens on tort actions on a case-by-case basis.

             D.       Providers are prohibited from pursuing money that has been awarded to a Medicaid
                      beneficiary. The provider is entitled to reimbursement from a tort judgment or settlement
                      only when the settlement distinguishes a set amount of money for medical expenses, and
                      only if this amount is above the amount owed to Medicaid. The provider lien must be
                      against the tortfeasor and not the general assets of the beneficiary. In the case of tort liens,
                      on or before 24 months from the date of injury, the provider may return the payment the
                      provider received from Medicaid for the claims related to that injury.

804.2       REPAYMENT OF MEDICAID PAYMENT

            Repayment of the Medicaid payment is a waiver by the provider of any further claims against
            Medicaid based on claims for that injury. Once a Medicaid payment is returned for the purpose of
            pw·suing a tort lien, the provider's claim against Medicaid is ended. Providers who return Medicaid
            payments to pursue liens will not be allowed to bill Medicaid again at a later date in an effort to
            secure the entire previously paid Medicaid amount, or for payment above the lien recovery amount
            to secure a minimum of Medicaid's allowable.

            A.        Repayment to Medicaid must be made prior to any action being taken by the provider to
                      pursue the lien. The pursuit of a lien before returning the Medicaid payments violates
                      federal regulation and the terms of the provider's agreement. In no event may a provider
                      delay returning Medicaid payment until after a settlement or judgment is received.


  December 28, 2018                     COST SAVINGS PROGRAM                                 Section 804 Pa e I
                                                                                      MTL 02/ 1 9
                                                                        Section:
 DIVISION OF HEALTH CARE FINANCING AND POLICY                                             804

                                                                        Subject:
 MEDICAID OPERATIONAL MANUAL                                             SUBROGATION - TH IRD PARTY
                                                                                 LIABILITY

804.3       PROCEDURES FOR SUBROGATION LIEN REQUEST

            The TPL vendor may use a secured maintained system separate from the DHCFP or its contracted
            Fiscal Agent. The following process outlines details specific to the process for the DHCFP
            subrogation lead and Chief Financial Officer (CFO). The TPL vendor must provide their system
            development procedures to review and track for an overview to the DHCFP TPL staff, even in
            cases where the TPL vendor is acting as the subcontractor to the State · s Fiscal agent.

            A.        The DHCFP lead will receive requests in a secured Excel spreadsheet fomrnt from the TPL
                      vendor on a weekly basis via email. The spreadsheet lists specific data for the DHCFP to
                      download for evaluation and to make determinations in the best interest of the State.

                      The spreadsheet located on the DHCFP shared drive is a back up to what has been evaluated
                      and entered into the TPL vendor system.

            B.        Once the DHCFP lead reviews, verifies and provides recommendation embedded in the
                      spreadsheet, the CFO is notified of the number ofonew and/or pending cases that are waiting
                      for review. Once this information has been reviewed, verified and recommendation has
                      been agreed upon or changed by the CFO. then this information will be entered into the
                      TPL vendor system. Once completed, the information will be returned to the TPL vendor
                      so they can notify the attorney or other interested party of the State decision.

                      I.     A case that has already received the state· s recommended settlement reduction may
                             be resubmitted to the DHCFP for revalue. The TPL vendor must document the case
                             was resubmitted for a new reduction based on representing attorney request via
                             spreadsheet or through a fo1111 of communication.
                                                                                 ..
                      2.     Sample language: '·Reduction already proposed at $XX or . . Revalue Request from
                             $XX.''

            C.        The DHCFP lead and CFO will complete this process within ten business days of State
                      receipt for most cases. Longer processing times may apply for appeals, complex cases and
                      requests resulting in a lien reduction of more than $100,000.00 or cases awaiting a response
                      from the DHCFP attorney. If additional time is needed, written communication to the TPL
                      vendor subrogation lead will be required.

804.4       PROCEDURE FOR THE DHCFP

            A.        LEAD

                      I.     The lead will receive the Casualty Lien Reduction request spreadsheet via secured
                             email.



  December 28, 2018                    COST SAVINGS PROGRAM                               Section 804 Pa e 2
                                                                                     MTL 02/ 1 9
                                                                      Section:
DIVISION OF HEALTH CARE FINANCING AND POLICY                                             804

                                                                      Subject:
MEDICAID OPERATIONAL MANUAL                                            SUBROGATIONo- THIRD PARTY
                                                                               LIABILITY

                      2.   Analyzes spreadsheet, reviews documentation presented for each case as
                           appropriate:

                           a.     Ensures the required information in the spreadsheet is complete;

                                   I.      Date entered,

                                  2.       Requested status (new, pending or revalue), and

                                  3.       Data contained in the spreadsheet accurately reflects and matches
                                           TPL documents provided.

                                  4.       Follows calculation rules outlined in Section 804.5.

                           b.     If spreadsheet is incomplete or not accurate to information in TPL tracking
                                  system, request clarification fom
                                                                 r
                                                                     TPL vendor.

                      3.   Record lead recommendation for each subrogation case using established
                           guidelines located on spreadsheet. Also, located at the end of this document.

                      4.   For any requests resulting ino$ I 00,000.00 or more in settlement or reduction, verify
                           documentation in TPL system:

                           a.     Any case overo$ I 00,000.00 needs to be brought to the attention of the CFO
                                  as soon as possible. Add the summary to the email when the reduction
                                  request spreadsheet has been saved into the shared drive.

                           b.     View case breakdown summary attached in TPL system,

                           c.     Verify with the DHCFP CFO case recommendation direction due to case
                                  and lien reduction request and amount.

                           d.     In ce11ain cases, the CFO may need to submit to the Division's
                                  Administrator and the DAG.

                      5.   On a weekly basis, inform the CFO via email the number of cases for that week:

                           a.     Completed with recommendations for their review and final decision.

                           b.     Marked: "High Importance" flag.

                           c.     Monitor the requests to ensure timely processing by the DHCFP, sending
                                  reminders and/or assisting the CFO to manage the requests pending State


December 28, 20 1 8                     COST SA VTNGS PROGRAM                            Section 804 Pa e 3
                                                                                MTL 02/19
                                                                  Section:
DIVISION OF HEALTH CARE FINANCING AND POLICY                                        804

                                                                  Subject:
MEDICAID OPERATIONAL MANUAL                                        SUBROGATION - THIRD PARTY
                                                                           LIABILITY

                                 decision.

                     6.   Once the CFO provides the State decision;

                          a.     They will save their final decision within the spreadsheet on the Shared
                                 drive; or

                          b.     The CFO will enter their final ruling 111 the TPL system for vendor
                                 immediate review.

           B.        CHIEF FI ANCIAL O FFICER (CFO):

                     I.   Receive Casualty Lien Reduction requests via email from lead.

                     2.   Reviews recommendations and TPL vendors provided data for each case via
                          spreadsheet and in the TPL vendors system.

                          a.     Access TPL system to review case documents and TPL vendor notes as
                                 needed for case decision.

                     3.   Applies State decisions for each case in TPL vendor system and spreadsheet
                          (spreadsheet is currently a back up to the TPL vendor tracking system).

                          a.     For cases where there are questions, add notes in the TPL system pending
                                 response, notate on spreadsheet in comments field for others to review who
                                 may not have TPL system access.

                     4.   Consult with the DAG as needed for complex cases or concerns.

                          a.     DHCFP DAG for Subrogation:
                                 Deputy Attorney General
                                 Depa1tment of Health and Human Services
                                 Division of Health Care Financing and Policy
                                 Nevada Office of the Attorney General
                                 555 E. Washington Avenue, Suite 3900
                                 Las Vegas, Nevada 8910 I
                                 (702) 486-3107
                                 (702) 486-3773 (fax)

                     5.   Once the decisions arc made through team discussion (CFO, Lead and DAG), enter
                          finalized case decisions via TPL system and the DHCFP spreadsheet located on the
                          shared drive.



 December 28, 2018                 COST SAVINGS PROGRAM                             Section 804 Pa e 4
                                                                                        MTL 02/19
                                                                         Section:
 DIVISION OF HEALTH CARE FINANCING AND POLICY                                               804

                                                                         Subject:
MEDICAID OPERATIONAL MANUAL                                               SUBROGATION - THIRD PARTY
                                                                                  LIABILITY

804.5        CALCULATION RULES

            The DHCFP" s calculation and decision related to the lien reduction request is based on NRS
            422.293 guidelines. Nevada developed a combination of Self-Calculated Conditional Payment
            (SCP) model that enables the State to self-calculate the demand amount before settlement in certain
            situations, and a Fixed Ratio Option (FRO) reduction amount which offers a simple,
            straightforward process to obtain the percentage amount due to Medicaid. Based on personal injury
            case under Mahler vs Szuc (1998), the Mahler Reduction Calculation was developed where
            Medicaid state agencies recoup one-third of the gross settlement. An additional reduction is
            dete1mined based on attorney reduction. Logic for the 25% reduction is to help pay for attorney
            fees and costs.

            A.        The DHCFP will reduce the total settlement by one-third, and then reduce the one-third by
                      25%.

             B.       If the lien is less than one-third of the total settlement, then reduce the lien by 25% using
                      the lien amount to help pay for attorney fees and costs.

            C.        In the lien reduction request, the representing attorney will include an amount that they will
                      accept (an offer). If that amount is more than the amount derived from the above
                      calculations. the DHCFP \,vi i i accept the attorney's offer.

             D.       If the representing attorney · s offer is less than the amount derived from the above
                      calculations, the DHCFP may counter-offer with the amount resulting from the
                      calculations.

804.6        CONSIDERATIO NS

            A.        Medicaid can only recover the amount paid out for claims related to the accident/injury.

                      I.     Medicaid can only take the lesser of the lien amount or the settlement amount.

            B.        A lien reduction request will only be considered if the representing attorney or other
                      interested party submits the request in writing.

            C.        The DHCFP uses a formula to detennine equitable, consistent and fair lien reductions
                      based upon the Ahlborn case decision and other case law.

                      I.     As of October I , 20 I 7, Section 202 of the Act, · ·strengthening Medicaid Third­
                             Party Liability' · was updated to amend po1tions of Section l 902(a)(25) to allow
                             state Medicaid agencies to recover funds paid for medical treatment from any
                             to1tious settlement or judgment proceeds received by a Medicaid beneficiary. The



  December 28, 2018                    COST SAVINOS PROGRAM                                Section 804 Pa e 5
                                                                                     MTL 02/19
                                                                       Section:
DIVISION OF HEALTH CARE FINANCING AND POLICY                                             804

                                                                       Subject:
MEDICAID OPERATIONAL MANUAL                                             SUBROGATION - THIRD PARTY
                                                                                LJABJ LJTY

                           states will be permitted to recover from the entire settlement proceeds, not just
                           funds designated as payment for medical care.

          D.        ff Medicaid is taking a loss of over $100,000.00, the State will abide by past interpretation
                    of the one-third rule of the settlement cost and not reduce further.

          E.        State responses to lien reduction requests must abide by past interpretations of the one­
                    third rule and the guidance from the Nevada Deputy Attorney General"s Office.

                    I.     ff a request to reduce a Medicaid lien by more than $ I 00,000.00 is received, then
                           the DHCFP CFO must be notified and approve the request.

                    2.     If a request to reduce a Medicaid lien by more than $ I 00,000.00 is received and the
                           CFO is not available, then the DHCFP Administrator must be notified and approve
                           the request.




December 28, 2018                    COST SAVINGS PROGRAM                                Section 804 Pa e 6
                                                                                                    MTL 02/19
                                                                                  Section:
DIVISION OF HEALTH CARE FINANCING AND POLICY                                                             804

                                                                                  Subject:
MEDICAID OPERATIONAL MANUAL                                                        SUBROGATJON - THIRD PARTY
                                                                                           LIABILITY

  F.          CALCULATION EXAMPLE

                               Settlement>Lien             Lien<Settlement              This line is auto populated and will
                                                                                        reflect the direction of the
                                                                                        decision; Settlement or Lien.
                               Name of Victim              Name of Victim
                                                                                        Name o f i niured person
   Gross Settlement                    $25,000.00                    $ 1 5,000.00       Total amount of cash settlement
      Gross billed to MCD             $ 1 78.582.50                $2 1 4,439.37        Total amount billed to Medicaid
   MCD Claims                          $23,772.26                    $22,588.28         Claims Paid by Medicaid
   Attorney Reduction                NO                          YES
   Yes or No
      1 /3 of Settlement=                $8,333 .00                     $5,000.00       Auto populated
      2/3 of Lien=                      $ 1 5,856 . 1 0                $ 1 5,856. 1 0   Auto populated
   I F Attorney reduces                                                 $3,750.00
   then 25%
         Victim Gains                     $8. 1 83 .00            ( $ 5 1 ,2871 .00)    Amount the victim wi l l retain from
                                                                                        injury. The representing attorney
                                                                                        can adjust their fees and cost.
   Attorney Fees                          $8.333 .00                   $ 1 5,000.00
   Attorney Cost                           $ 1 50.00                   $47,52 1 .00
   Total: Fee + Cost =                    $8.483.00                    $62,52 1 .00
   Attorney Reducing:                NO                          YES                    Attorney reduction also drives
          Yes or No                                                                     collection outcome.
   Attorney Offer                              $0.00                         $0.00      Medicaid disagrees with zero
                                                                                        collection. Only     Ill  special
                                                                                        ci rcumstance would Medicaid
                                                                                        accept zero: if the representing
                                                                                        attorney takes zero Medicaid will
                                                                                        evaluate with the DAG.
   Attorney Offer is xo/o                     0.00%                         0.00%
   of Lien
   LEAD                                   $8J33 .00                     $3,750.00
   Recommendation
   CFO Final Offer                       $8333 .00                     $3,750.00
   Offer is x% of Lien                      35.05%                       1 6.60%
   Comment Line               Settlement> Lien +          Lien> Settlement +            Provide explanation or Notes on
                            Attorney NOT Reduced          Attorney Reduced              case decision.




December 28, 2018                       COST SAVINGS PROGRAM                                             Section 804 Pa e 7
                                                                                      MTL 02/19
                                                                        Section:
DIVISION OF HEALTH CARE FINANCING AND POLICY                                              805

                                                                        Subject:
MEDICAID OPERATIONAL MANUAL                                                           PROBATES


805         PROBATES

           The DHCFP may file a Creditor· s Claim with the court for recovery in any probate associated with
           Medicaid benefits that have been paid on behalf of a deceased recipient. The amount recovered is
           dete1mined by the assets available in the estate as well as the expenses of the estate.

            When a probate has been opened for a deceased Medicaid recipient as a result of a set1lement from
            an accident, injury or from wrongful death, MER will coordinate its claim against the estate of the
            deceased individual with the subrogation claim of the TPL vendor.

            A.       When a probate is received in which the estate consists of a settlement relating to an injury
                     from an accident or relating to wrongful death, MER will contact the TPL vendor to
                     determine whether any of the Medicaid benefits paid were related to the accident.

            B.       If the TPL vendor has a subrogation claim and received payment on their claim, MER will
                     reduce its claim by the total amount of the TPL subrogation claim, regardless of the amount
                     of payment received by the TPL vendor.

            C.       If the TPL vendor does not have subrogation claims against the estate or does not receive
                     payment on their claim, then MER may submit the full amount of it claims.




 December 28, 2018                    COST SAVINGS PROGRAM                               Section 805 Pa e I

