Source URL: https://www.law.cornell.edu/regulations/new-york/18-NYCRR-360-7.11
Retrieved: 2026-09-23

N.Y. Comp. Codes R. & Regs. Tit. 18 §§ 360-7.11 - Medical assistance liens and recoveries | State Regulations | US Law | LII / Legal Information Institute 

 Please help us improve our site!

 × 

 No thank you 

 Skip to main content 

 Cornell Law
 School 
 Search
 Cornell 

 Toggle navigation 

 Please help
 us improve our site! 

 Support Us! 

 Search 

 About
 LII 

 Who We Are 

 What We Do 

 Who Pays For This 

 Contact Us 

 Get the
 law 

 Constitution 

 Supreme Court 

 U.S. Code 

 CFR 

 Federal Rules 

 Federal Rules of Appellate Procedure 

 Federal Rules of Civil Procedure 

 Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure 

 Federal Rules of Evidence 

 Federal Rules of Bankruptcy Procedure 

 U.C.C. 

 Law by jurisdiction 

 State law 

 Uniform laws 

 Federal law 

 World law 

 Lawyer directory 

 Legal encyclopedia 

 Business law 

 Constitutional law 

 Criminal law 

 Family law 

 Employment law 

 Money and Finances 

 More... 

 Help out 

 Give 

 Sponsor 

 Advertise 

 Create 

 Promote 

 Join Lawyer Directory 

 LII 

 State Regulations 

 New York Codes,Rules,and Regulations 

 N.Y. Comp. Codes R. & Regs. tit. 18 - DEPARTMENT OF SOCIAL SERVICES 

 Chapter II - Regulations of the Department of Social Services 

 Subchapter B - Public Assistance 

 Article 2 - Determination of Eligibility-Categorical 

 N.Y. Comp. Codes R. & Regs. tit. 18, ch. II, subch. B, art. 2, pt. 360 - MEDICAL ASSISTANCE 

 Subpart 360-7 - Payment For Services 

 N.Y. Comp. Codes R. & Regs. Tit. 18 §§ 360-7.11 - Medical assistance liens and recoveries

 N.Y. Comp. Codes R. & Regs. Tit. 18 §§ 360-7.11 - Medical assistance liens and recoveries 

 State Regulations 

 Compare

 (a) Liens. The social services district may
 not impose any lien against a person's property prior to his or her death for
 MA paid or to be paid on his or her behalf except: 
 (1) based upon a court judgment for benefits
 incorrectly paid; or

 (2) against
 claims and suits for personal injuries, to recover the amount of MA furnished
 to a person on and after the date the person incurred the injuries;
 or

 (3) with respect to the real
 property of a person who is an in-patient in a nursing facility, intermediate
 care facility for the mentally retarded, or other medical institution, and who
 is not reasonably expected to be discharged from the medical institution and
 return home, provided that: (i) any such lien
 will dissolve upon the person's discharge and return home; and

 (ii) no lien may be imposed on the person's
 home if the person's spouse, child under 21 years of age, certified blind or
 certified disabled child of any age, or sibling who has an equity interest in
 the home and who resided in the home for at least one year immediately before
 the date of the person's admission to the medical institution, is lawfully
 residing in the home.

 (b) Adjustments and recoveries. 
 (1) A social services district may make no
 adjustment or recovery for MA correctly paid except from: 
 (i) the estate of a person who was 65 years
 of age or older when he or she received MA; or

 (ii) the sale of real property subject to a
 lien imposed pursuant to paragraph (a)(3) of this section, or from the estate
 of such a person; or

 (iii) a
 legally responsible relative of an MA recipient, and then only the amount of MA
 granted, provided the relative has sufficient income and resources which he or
 she fails or refuses to make available. The amount of income and resources
 required to be contributed by a legally responsible relative is determined
 under Subpart 360-4 of this Part.

 (2) An adjustment or recovery under
 subparagraph (1)(i) or (ii) of this subdivision may be made from a person's
 estate only after the death of the person's surviving spouse, and only when the
 person has no surviving child who is under 21 years of age or who is certified
 blind or certified disabled.

 (3) In
 addition to the limitations set forth in paragraph (2) of this subdivision, in
 the case of a lien on a person's home, no adjustment or recovery may be made
 when: (i) a sibling of the person resided in
 the home for at least one year immediately before the date of the person's
 admission to the medical institution, and has lawfully resided in the home on a
 continuous basis since the date of admission; or

 (ii) a child of the person resided in the
 home for a period of at least two years immediately before the date of the
 person's admission to a medical institution, provided care to such person which
 permitted the person to reside at home rather than in an institution, and has
 lawfully resided in the home on a continuous basis since the date of
 admission.

 (4) A social
 services district may maintain an action pursuant to sections
 101 and
 104 of the
 Social Services Law to collect from a trustee, grantor, or grantor's spouse any
 beneficial interest of the grantor or grantor's spouse in any trust established
 other than by will, to reimburse such district for the amount of MA granted to,
 or on behalf of, a grantor or grantor's spouse. The beneficial interest of the
 grantor or grantor's spouse includes any income and principal amounts to which
 the grantor or grantor's spouse would be entitled under the terms of the trust,
 by right or in the discretion of the trustee, assuming the full exercise of
 discretion by the trustee.

 (5) If
 an MA recipient receives an insurance settlement for personal injuries which
 includes an amount for medical bills, the social services district may recover
 from such amount the cost of MA provided for the treatment of the
 injuries.

 (6) A social services
 district may maintain an action under the Debtor and Creditor Law to set aside
 any transaction which appears to have been made for the purpose of qualifying a
 person for MA or for avoiding a lien or recovery of MA paid on behalf of an MA
 recipient.

 Notes

 N.Y. Comp.
 Codes R. & Regs. Tit. 18 
 §§
 360-7.11 

 State regulations are updated quarterly; we currently have two versions available.
 Below is a comparison between our most recent version and the prior quarterly release. 
 More comparison features will be added as we have more versions to compare.

 No prior version found.

 State Regulations Toolbox

 Accessibility 

 About LII 

 Contact us 

 Advertise here 

 Help 

 Terms of use 

 Privacy
