Source URL: https://web.archive.org/web/20260609080226id_/https://codes.ohio.gov/ohio-administrative-code/rule-5160:1-2-07
Retrieved: 2026-09-23

Rule 5160:1-2-07 - Ohio Administrative Code | Ohio Laws 

 Skip to main content 

 Administrative Code Keywords 

 Rule Number 

 Go To Rule 

 Laws

 Ohio Constitution 

 Ohio Revised Code 

 Ohio Administrative Code 

 About

 About 

 Contact

 Contact 

 Related Sites

 Related Sites 

 Back To Top 
 Top

 Home

 Laws

 Ohio Constitution 

 Ohio Revised Code 

 Ohio Administrative Code 

 About

 Contact

 Related Sites

 Go To

 Administrative Code Number 

 Go 

 Administrative Code Keywords 

 This website publishes administrative rules on their effective dates, as designated by the adopting state agencies, colleges, and
 universities.

 Rule 5160:1-2-07 | Medicaid: estate recovery.

 Ohio Administrative Code 

 /

 5160:1 

 /

 Chapter 5160:1-2 | Medicaid Application Procedures 

 Effective:

 January 1, 2018

 Promulgated Under:

 111.15 

 PDF:

 Download Authenticated PDF 

 (A) This rule describes Ohio's
 medicaid estate recovery program and the undue hardship waiver request
 process.
 (B) Definitions.
 (1) "Estate"
 includes both of the following:
 (a) All real and personal property and other assets to be
 administered under Title XXI of the Revised Code and property that would be
 administered under that title if not for section 2113.03 or 2113.031 of the
 Revised Code; and
 (b) Any other real and personal property and other assets
 in which an individual had any legal title or interest at the time of death (to
 the extent of the interest), including assets conveyed to a survivor, heir, or
 assign of the individual through joint tenancy, tenancy in common,
 survivorship, life estate, living trust, or other arrangement.
 (2) "Home" as
 defined in rule 5160:1-3-05.13 of the Administrative Code.
 (3) "Individual," for the purpose of this rule,
 means someone with past or current medicaid eligibility.
 (4) "Permanently
 institutionalized individual" as defined in section 5162.21 of the Revised
 Code.
 (5) "Person
 responsible for the estate" as defined in section 2117.061 of the Revised
 Code.
 (6) "Qualified long- term care
 partnership (QLTCP)" as defined in rule 5160:1-6-02.2 of the
 Administrative Code.
 (7) "Time of death" as defined
 in section 5162.21 of the Revised Code.
 (C) The Ohio attorney general (AGO) will
 seek recovery or adjustment, on behalf of the Ohio department of medicaid
 (ODM), from the estates of the following individuals:
 (1) A permanently
 institutionalized individual of any age, in the amount of all medicaid benefits
 correctly paid including managed care capitation payments; or
 (2) An individual
 fifty-five years of age or older who is not permanently institutionalized, in
 the amount of all medicaid benefits correctly paid including managed care
 capitation payments (other than benefits paid on or after January 1, 2010,
 under the medicare premium assistance programs set forth in rule 5160:1-3-02.1 
 of the Administrative Code) after the individual attained such
 age.
 (D) Any adjustment or recovery under
 paragraph (C) of this rule may be sought only:
 (1) After the death of
 the individual's surviving spouse, if any; and
 (2) When the individual
 has no surviving child who either is under age twenty-one or is blind or
 permanently and totally disabled as defined in Chapter 5160:1-3 of the
 Administrative Code; and
 (3) When recovery is
 sought against a permanently institutionalized individual under paragraph
 (C)(1) of this rule, no recovery may be made against the individual's home
 while either of the following lawfully resides in the home:
 (a) The permanently institutionalized individual's
 sibling who:
 (i) Resided in the home
 for at least one year immediately before the date of the individual's
 admission to the institution, and
 (ii) Has resided in the
 home on a continuous basis since that time.
 (b) The permanently institutionalized individual's son
 or daughter who:
 (i) Provided care to the
 permanently institutionalized individual that delayed the individual's
 institutionalization, and
 (ii) Resided in the home
 for at least two years immediately before the date of the individual's
 admission to the institution, and
 (iii) Has resided in the
 home on a continuous basis since that time, and
 (iv) Documents that he or
 she has fulfilled these requirements by submitting the following:
 (a) A written statement
 of the date that he or she moved into the home;
 (b) A level of care
 assessment showing that the individual would have become institutionalized
 earlier without care provided by the adult son or daughter;
 (c) A written statement
 from the individual's attending physician, stating the kind and duration
 of care that was required to delay the individual's institutionalization;
 and
 (d) All relevant
 documentation of the care that delayed institutionalization and the role the
 adult son or daughter played in that care. This documentation shall include
 (but is not limited to) one or more of the following:
 (i) A written statement
 of the number of hours per day during which the adult son or daughter provided
 personal care, specifying the extent and type of care provided;
 (ii) A written statement
 of any part-time or full-time jobs performed by the adult son or daughter, and
 any schools or other similar institutions attended by the adult son or
 daughter, while providing care; or
 (iii) Written
 documentation from a service agency which provided care to the individual, the
 dates on which care was provided, and the extent and type of care
 provided.
 (E) Notice requirements.
 (1) When an individual
 was age fifty-five or older or was permanently institutionalized at the time of
 death, the person responsible for the estate shall give notice to the AGO, as
 required by section 2117.061 of the Revised Code.
 (2) After the
 individual's death, whenever adjustment or recovery is sought by ODM or
 its designee, a claim for recovery shall be presented by the AGO.
 (a) The claim shall include all information required by
 Chapter 2117. of the Revised Code and shall be served on the person responsible
 for the estate or, when there is no person responsible for the estate, any
 person who received or controls probate or non-probate assets inherited from
 the individual.
 (b) The claim shall include the following:
 (i) The definition of
 undue hardship as stated in paragraph (H) of this rule; 
 (ii) The process for
 requesting an undue hardship as set forth in paragraph (I) of this rule;
 and
 (iii) The date by which
 the request for an undue hardship waiver is to be received by ODM.
 (3) The person
 responsible for the estate shall notify any person who received or controls
 probate or non-probate assets, inherited from the individual, affected by the
 proposed recovery.
 (F) When the person responsible for the
 estate from which recovery is sought requests to satisfy the claim without
 selling a non-liquid asset subject to recovery, the AGO may establish a payment
 schedule, promissory note, or lien.
 (G) Qualified long-term care partnership
 disregard.
 (1) The amount of
 resources disregarded at eligibility determination (as established in rule
 5160:1-6-02.2 of the Administrative Code) will be disregarded during estate
 recovery.
 (2) The following
 resources, which are not considered a resource at eligibility determination,
 will not be disregarded during estate recovery:
 (a) Special needs trusts as established in rule
 5160:1-3-05.2 of the Administrative Code;
 (b) Pooled trusts as established in rule 5160:1-3-05.2 of
 the Administrative Code; and
 (c) Annuities as described in rule 5160:1-3-05.3 of the
 Administrative Code.
 (3) The QLTCP disregard
 at estate recovery is reduced to the extent that an individual made a transfer
 (that would otherwise have been considered an improper transfer under rule
 5160:1-6-06 of the Administrative Code) without a restricted medicaid coverage
 period.
 (H) The ODM director, or designee, may
 grant an undue hardship waiver on a case-by-case basis when there are
 compelling circumstances.
 (1) ODM may, at the sole
 discretion of the ODM director or the director's designee, waive estate
 recovery when recovery would work an undue hardship on an individual's
 survivors. Undue hardship may be found in the following cases.
 (a) The estate subject to recovery is the sole
 income-producing asset of the survivor, such as a family farm or other family
 business, which:
 (i) Produces a limited
 amount of income, or
 (ii) Is the sole asset of
 the survivor.
 (b) Without receipt of the estate proceeds, the survivor
 would become eligible for public assistance.
 (c) Recovery would deprive the survivor of necessary food,
 shelter or clothing. Deprivation does not include situations in which the
 survivor is merely inconvenienced but would not be at risk of serious
 harm.
 (d) The survivor provides clear and convincing evidence of
 substantial personal financial contributions to the deceased individual,
 creating an equity interest in the property.
 (e) The survivor is age sixty-five or older and financially
 dependent upon receipt of the estate proceeds.
 (f) The estate proceeds are preserved for the benefit of a
 survivor who:
 (i) Is totally and
 permanently disabled as defined in Chapter 5160:1-3 of the Administrative Code;
 and
 (ii) Is financially
 dependent upon receipt of the estate proceeds.
 (2) The following
 situations do not, without additional showing of hardship, show undue
 hardship:
 (a) When recovery will prevent heirs from receiving an
 anticipated inheritance.
 (b) When recovery results in the loss of a pre-existing
 standard of living, or prevents the establishment of a source of maintenance
 that did not exist prior to the individual's death.
 (3) Regardless of actual
 hardship, an undue hardship waiver will not be granted in the following
 situations:
 (a) When the individual created the hardship by using
 estate planning methods under which the individual divested, transferred, or
 otherwise encumbered assets in whole or in part to avoid estate
 recovery.
 (b) When an undue hardship waiver will result in the
 payment of claims to other creditors with lower priority standing under
 Ohio's probate law.
 (I) Request for undue hardship
 waiver.
 (1) Within thirty
 calendar days after notice of the estate recovery claim was mailed by the AGO,
 an undue hardship waiver may be requested by an heir or potential heir who
 would suffer an undue hardship if a waiver is not granted, a person with an
 interest in assets of the estate, or a representative of such persons. An undue
 hardship waiver may not be requested by a creditor of the estate, unless such
 creditor is also a potential heir of the estate.
 (2) Within sixty calendar
 days of receipt of the request for an undue hardship waiver, ODM shall notify
 the applicant whether the waiver request has been approved (in full, in part,
 or for a limited time) or denied. Failure to meet this sixty day deadline does
 not result in an automatic decision on the request.
 (3) When the waiver
 request was not approved in full, or when the approval was time-limited, the
 applicant may, within thirty calendar days, request that the ODM director, or
 designee, review the undue hardship waiver decision.
 (a) The ODM director, or designee, will review only those
 portions of the undue hardship waiver request that were denied or time-limited.
 The director will not deny or limit any portion of the undue hardship waiver
 request that has already been granted.
 (b) The ODM director, or designee, shall review the undue
 hardship waiver request and notify the applicant within sixty calendar days
 whether (at the director's sole discretion) the director, or designee, has
 approved (in full, in part, or for a limited time) or denied the request for an
 undue hardship waiver. Failure to meet this sixty day deadline does not result
 in an automatic decision on the request.
 (J) Within thirty days after notice of
 the estate recovery claim was mailed by the AGO, a person with an interest in
 assets of the estate (or a representative of any such person) may present a
 claim showing evidence that assets of the estate are exempt assets under one of
 the following categories.
 (1) Government reparation
 payments to special populations are exempt from medicaid estate
 recovery.
 (2) Certain American
 Indian and Alaska native income and resources, including:
 (a) American Indian and Alaska native income and resources
 which are exempt from medicaid estate recovery by other laws and
 regulations;
 (b) Ownership interest (when ownership would pass from an
 Indian to one or more relatives; to a tribe or tribal organization; and/or to
 one or more Indians) in trust or non-trust property, including real property
 and improvements:
 (i) Located on a
 reservation (any federally recognized Indian tribe's reservation, pueblo,
 or colony, including former reservations in Oklahoma, Alaska native regions
 established by Alaska native claims settlement act and Indian allotments) or
 near a reservation as designated and approved by the bureau of Indian affairs
 of the U.S. department of the interior; or
 (ii) For any
 federally-recognized tribe not described in paragraph (J)(2)(b)(i) of this
 rule, located within the most recent boundaries of a prior federal reservation;
 or
 (c) Income left as a remainder in an estate derived from
 property protected in paragraph (J)(2)(b) of this rule, that was either
 collected by an Indian, or by a tribe or a tribal organization and distributed
 to an Indian, as long as the income clearly comes from protected
 sources;
 (d) Ownership interests left as a remainder in an estate in
 rents, leases, royalties, or usage rights related to natural resources
 (including extraction of natural resources or harvesting of timber, other
 plants and plant products, animals, fish, and shellfish) resulting from the
 exercise of federally-protected rights, and income either collected by an
 Indian, or by a tribe or tribal organization and distributed to an Indian
 derived from these sources the income or ownership interest clearly comes from
 protected sources; and
 (e) Ownership interests in or usage rights to items that
 have unique religious, spiritual, traditional, and/or cultural significance or
 rights that support subsistence or a traditional life style according to
 applicable tribal law or custom.

 Last updated November 17, 2025 at 10:08 AM

 Supplemental Information

 Authorized By: 
 5162.21 

 Amplifies: 
 5162.21 , 5162.211 , 5162.23 , 5164.86 

 Current Five Year Review Date: -->
 -->

 Five Year Review Date: 
 1/1/2023 

 Prior Effective Dates: 
 7/1/2000, 9/1/2007, 1/1/2010, 1/15/2015 

 Disclaimer 
 Contact 
 About 

 -->

-->
