Source URL: https://www.oklegislature.gov/OK_Statutes/CompleteTitles/os63.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-09-23
Note: extract from OK-title63-full.txt (full title PDF from official Legislature site)

§63-5051.3. Medical assistance - Homestead lien.
    A. Pursuant to the provisions of this section, the Oklahoma
Health Care Authority is authorized to file and enforce a lien
against the homestead of a recipient for payments of medical
assistance made by the Authority to the recipient who is an
inpatient of a nursing facility or an intermediate care facility for
individuals with intellectual disabilities (ICF/IID) if the
Authority, upon competent medical testimony, determines the
recipient cannot reasonably be expected to be discharged and
returned home. A one-year period of compensated inpatient care at a
nursing facility or an ICF/IID shall constitute a determination by
the Authority that the recipient cannot reasonably be expected to be
discharged and returned home.
    B. Upon certification for Title XIX of the federal Social
Security Act payments for a nursing facility or ICF/IID care, the
Authority shall provide written notice to the recipient that:
    1. A one-year period of compensated inpatient care at a nursing
facility or ICF/IID shall constitute a determination by the
Authority that the recipient cannot reasonably be expected to be
discharged and returned home;
    2. A lien will be filed against the homestead of the recipient
pursuant to the provisions of this section and that the amount of
the lien shall be for the amount of assistance paid by the Authority
from the date the recipient became eligible for compensated
inpatient care at a nursing facility or ICF/IID until the time of
the filing of the lien and for any amount paid thereafter for such
medical assistance to the recipient; and
    3. The recipient is entitled to a hearing with the Authority
prior to the filing of the lien pursuant to this section.
    The notice shall also contain an explanation of the lien and the
effect the lien will have on the ownership of the homestead of the
recipient and any other person residing in the homestead. The
notice shall be signed by the recipient or the legal guardian of the
recipient acknowledging that the recipient or the legal guardian of
the recipient understands the notice and the effect that the payment
of medical assistance on the recipient's behalf will have upon the
homestead of the recipient.


Oklahoma Statutes - Title 63. Public Health and Safety        Page 1745
    C. The lien filed pursuant to subsection E of this section
shall be for the amount of assistance paid beginning from the date
the recipient began receiving inpatient care from a nursing facility
or ICF/IID and for any amount paid thereafter for the medical
assistance to the recipient.
    D. The Authority shall not file a lien on the homestead of the
recipient pursuant to subsection E of this section while the
homestead is the lawful residence of:
    1. The surviving spouse of the recipient;
    2. A child related to the recipient by blood or marriage who is
twenty (20) years of age or less;
    3. An adult child related to the recipient by blood or marriage
who is incapacitated as defined by the Authority; or
    4. A brother or sister of the recipient who has an equity
interest in the home and who was residing in the home for at least
one (1) year immediately preceding the date the recipient was
admitted to the nursing facility or ICF/IID and has resided there on
a continuous basis since that time.
    E. No lien for payment of medical assistance pursuant to this
section shall be effective unless:
    1. The Authority has provided notice to the recipient of the
intent to file a lien against the homestead of the recipient and of
the opportunity for a hearing on the matter; and
    2. After the notice specified in paragraph 1 of this subsection
has been given, a lien is filed for record against the legal
description of the homestead in the office of the county clerk of
the county in which the homestead of the recipient is located. The
lien shall contain the following information:
         a.   the name and address of the place of residence of the
              recipient,
         b.   the amount of the assistance paid at the time of the
              filing of the lien,
         c.   the date the recipient began receiving compensated
              inpatient care at a nursing facility or ICF/IID,
         d.   the legal description of the real property against
              which the lien will be recorded, and
         e.   such other information as the Authority requires.
    F. 1. After the lien has been filed pursuant to subsection E
of this section, the Authority may enforce a lien only:
         a.   after the death of the surviving spouse of the
              recipient,
         b.   when there is no child related to the recipient by
              blood or marriage who is twenty (20) years of age or
              less residing in the homestead,
         c.   when there is no adult child related to the recipient
              by blood or marriage who is incapacitated as defined
              by the Authority residing in the homestead, and


Oklahoma Statutes - Title 63. Public Health and Safety        Page 1746
                d.
              when no brother or sister of the recipient is residing
              in the homestead, who has resided there for at least
              one (1) year immediately before the date of the
              recipient's admission to the facility or institution,
              and has resided there on a continuous basis since that
              time.
    2. A lien filed pursuant to subsection E of this section shall
remain on the homestead:
         a.   until the lien is satisfied,
         b.   until the value of the homestead is consumed by the
              lien, at which time the Authority may force the sale
              of the homestead to satisfy the lien, or
         c.   after transfer of title of the real property by
              conveyance, sale, succession, inheritance, or will.
    3. The lien filed pursuant to subsection E of this section may
be enforceable by the Authority before or after the death of the
recipient.
    4. The lien created by this section shall be treated as a
mortgage and shall be assignable by the Authority to another entity
and shall be released in accordance with the provisions as set forth
in Section 15 of Title 46 of the Oklahoma Statutes.
    5. The lien shall sever a joint tenancy; however, the lien
shall be enforceable only to the extent of the ownership of the
person receiving assistance as it existed at the time the recipient
began receiving assistance.
    G. The recipient, the heirs, personal representative, or
assigns of the recipient may discharge said lien at any time by
paying the amount of the lien to the Authority.
    H. At the end of the one-year limitation, the Authority shall
exclude from consideration as a resource the value of the homestead
of the recipient.
    I. The payment of medical assistance on behalf of the recipient
by the Authority and the signing of the notice pursuant to
subsection B of this section shall constitute a waiver of the
homestead rights of the recipient for the purposes of this section
and Section 3 of Article XII of the Oklahoma Constitution.
    J. 1. Pursuant to the provisions of this subsection, if the
homestead is sold to enforce the lien authorized pursuant to the
provisions of this section, an amount up to Six Thousand Dollars
($6,000.00) from the proceeds of the sale of the homestead, less the
value of any prepaid burial or insurance policies or designated
accounts for funeral expenses already owned by the recipient, may be
set aside in an irrevocable trust on behalf of the recipient, in
which the Authority is to be included as the remainder, and the
funds are to be used for the funeral expenses of the recipient.
    2. Payment of the funeral expenses from the proceeds of the
sale of the homestead shall be made as follows:


Oklahoma Statutes - Title 63. Public Health and Safety        Page 1747
                a.
              if the proceeds exceed the amount of the lien, the
              payment of funeral expenses shall be first satisfied
              from any amount in excess of the lien amount. After
              the excess is exhausted, the remainder of funeral
              expenses shall be satisfied from the lien amount prior
              to payment of any reimbursement to the Authority, and
         b.   if the proceeds from the sale of the homestead do not
              exceed the amount of the lien, the payment of funeral
              expenses shall be satisfied from the lien amount prior
              to payment of any reimbursement to the Authority.
    K. As used in this section:
    1. "Nursing facility" means any home, establishment, or
institution which offers or provides on a regular basis twenty-four-
hour medical services, skilled nursing care, necessary special
dietary service, and personal care and supervision to three or more
of its residents who are not related to the owner or administrator
of the facility; and
    2. "ICF/IID" means intermediate care facilities for individuals
with intellectual disabilities, which provide comprehensive and
individualized health care and rehabilitation services to
individuals to promote their functional status and independence.
    L. If any provision of this section shall be in conflict with
any applicable federal statutes and regulations, the federal
statutes and regulations shall prevail and be controlling until such
time as the federal statutes and regulations shall be revised to
conform to this section.
Added by Laws 1986, c. 175, § 1, emerg. eff. May 15, 1986. Amended
by Laws 1996, c. 221, § 3, eff. Nov. 1, 1996. Renumbered from §
200b of Title 56 by Laws 1996, c. 221, § 6, eff. Nov. 1, 1996.
Amended by Laws 2015, c. 278, § 1, eff. Nov. 1, 2015; Laws 2017, c.
255, § 1, eff. Nov. 1, 2017.


