Source URL: https://www.oklegislature.gov/OK_Statutes/CompleteTitles/os60.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-09-23
Note: extract from OK-title60-full.txt (full title PDF from official Legislature site)

§60-1605.1.           Creditor claims - Rules.


Oklahoma Statutes - Title 60. Property                        Page 309
    A. Whether or not the terms of a trust contain a spendthrift
provision, the following rules apply:
    1. Except as provided by the laws of this state, during the
lifetime of the settlor, the property of a revocable trust is
subject to claims of the settlor's creditors; and
    2. Except as provided by the laws of this state, after the
death of a settlor, and subject to the settlor's right to direct the
source from which liabilities will be paid, the property of a trust
that was revocable at the settlor's death is subject to claims of
the settlor's creditors, costs of administration of the settlor's
estate, the expenses of the settlor's funeral and disposal of
remains, and statutory allowances to a surviving spouse and children
to the extent the settlor's probate estate is inadequate to satisfy
those claims, costs, expenses, and allowances.
    B. For purposes of this section:
    1. During the period the power may be exercised, the holder of
a power of withdrawal is treated in the same manner as the settlor
of a revocable trust to the extent of the property subject to the
power; and
    2. Upon the lapse, release, or waiver of the power, the holder
is treated as the settlor of the trust only to the extent the value
of the property affected by the lapse, release, or waiver exceeds
the greater of the amount specified in Section 2041(b)(2) or 2514(e)
of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, or Section 2503(b) of the
Internal Revenue Code of 1986, in each case as in effect on the
effective date of this act, or as later amended.
    ARTICLE 6
    REVOCABLE TRUSTS
Added by Laws 2025, c. 254, § 36, eff. Nov. 1, 2025.

§60-1606.1. Capacity of settlor of revocable trust.
    The capacity required to create, amend, revoke, or add property
to a revocable trust, or to direct the actions of the trustee of a
revocable trust, is the same as that required to make a will.
Added by Laws 2025, c. 254, § 37, eff. Nov. 1, 2025.

§60-1606.2. Settlor's powers - Power of withdrawal.
    A. To the extent a trust is revocable by a settlor, a trustee
may follow a direction of the settlor that is contrary to the terms
of the trust. To the extent a trust is revocable by a settlor in
conjunction with a person other than a trustee or person holding an
adverse interest, the trustee may follow a direction from the
settlor and the other person holding the power to revoke even if the
direction is contrary to the terms of the trust.
    B. To the extent a trust is revocable and the settlor has
capacity to revoke the trust, rights of the beneficiaries are



Oklahoma Statutes - Title 60. Property                        Page 310
subject to the control of, and the duties of the trustee are owed
exclusively to, the settlor.
    C. During the period the power may be exercised, the holder of
a power of withdrawal has the rights of a settlor of a revocable
trust under this section to the extent of the property subject to
the power.
Added by Laws 2025, c. 254, § 38, eff. Nov. 1, 2025.

§60-1606.3. Limitation on action contesting validity of revocable
trust - Distribution of trust property.
    A. A person may commence a judicial proceeding to contest the
validity of a trust that was revocable at the settlor's death within
three (3) years after the later of either the settlor's death or
actual or constructive notice of the existence and terms of the
trust.
    B. Upon the death of the settlor of a trust that was revocable
at the settlor's death, the trustee may proceed to distribute the
trust property in accordance with the terms of the trust. The
trustee is not subject to liability for doing so unless:
    1. The trustee knows of a pending judicial proceeding
contesting the validity of the trust;
    2. The trustee knows of claims, costs, expenses, or allowances
that would be payable from the trust pursuant to paragraph 2 of
subsection A of Section 36 of this act; or
    3. A potential contestant has notified the trustee of a
possible judicial proceeding to contest the trust and a judicial
proceeding is commenced within sixty (60) days after the contestant
sent the notification.
    C. A beneficiary of a trust that is determined to have been
invalid or which is subject to claims, costs, expenses, or
allowances under paragraph 2 of subsection B of this section is
liable to return any distribution received.
    ARTICLE 7
    OFFICE OF TRUSTEE
Added by Laws 2025, c. 254, § 39, eff. Nov. 1, 2025.


