Source URL: https://www.oregon.gov/oha/hsd/ohp/pages/payment-recovery.aspx
Retrieved: 2026-09-23

Oregon Health Authority : Oregon Health Plan (OHP) and Payment Recovery : Oregon Health Plan : State of Oregon 

 Skip to main content 

 An official website of the State of Oregon 
 Learn 
 How you know » 
 (how to identify a Oregon.gov website) 

 An official website of the State of Oregon » 

 Translate this site into other Languages 

 Toggle Main Menu 

 Main Navigation 

 About OHA   
 About OHA 
 Contact OHA 
 Budget and Legislation 
 Committees, Commissions and Workgroups 
 Digital Accessibility 
 Programs and Divisions 
 Policies 
 Public Meetings 
 Public Records Request 
 Questions and Comments 
 Rules 
 Oregon Health Forward 
 Topics A to Z 

 Programs and Services   
 Addiction Services 
 Crisis Lines - Get Help 
 DUII Resolution 
 Immunizations 
 Medicaid 
 Medical Marijuana Program 
 Mental Health Services 
 Oregon State Hospital 
 Oregon Educators Benefit Board (OEBB) 
 Public Employees' Benefit Board (PEBB) 
 WIC Program 
 Other Program and Service Related Topics 

 Oregon Health Plan   
 Oregon Health Plan Home 
 Log into your OHP Account (Opens in new window) 
 Do you qualify for OHP? (Opens in new window) 
 Apply 
 Fee Schedule 
 For Healthcare Providers 
 Preferred Drug List 
 Renew 
 Benefits 
 Other Oregon Health Plan Related Topics 

 Health System Reform   
 Coordinated Care Organizations (CCO) 
 Health Analytics Data 
 Health Care Cost Growth Target 
 Health Information Technology 
 Hospital Reporting 
 Oregon Health Policy Board 
 Recognized Clinics 
 Transformation Center 

 Licenses and Certificates   
 Birth, Death, Marriage and Divorce Records 
 Food Handler Cards 
 Health Care Facility Licensing 
 Health Licensing Office 
 Residential and Outpatient Behavioral Health 
 Other License and Certificate Related Topics 

 Public Health   
 Public Health Home 
 Data and Statistics 
 Disease and Conditions 
 Environmental Health 
 Health Licensing Office 
 Healthy People and Families 
 Preparedness 
 Prevention and Wellness 
 Provider and Partner Resources 
 State Public Health Laboratory 
 Other Public Health Related Topics 

 Jobs   
 Office of Information Services 
 Working at Oregon State Hospital 

 Search this site 

 Submit 

 close 

 Back to Home 

 Oregon Health Plan 

 You are here:

 Oregon Health Authority 
 Health Systems 
 Oregon Health Plan 
 Oregon Health Plan (OHP) and Payment Recovery

 tag, as divs are not allowed in 's --> 

 Oregon Health Plan (OHP) and Payment Recovery 

 Site Navigation 

 Overview

 When you applied for OHP, you agreed that any other medical payments you receive would go to the state. This is called “assignment of rights." 
 When the state collects these other payments, it is called “payment recovery." The state will keep the money it collects from other payers. This money helps other people get the care and services they need. 

 Estate Recovery

 After an OHP member dies, Oregon Department of Human Services (ODHS) will ask to be paid back for services that OHP covered after age 55 for people in long-term care. This is known as “estate recovery.”  Federal and state law require this.  
 Some of the money from estate recovery goes into ODHS programs to help other people. Some is returned to the federal government so Oregon may continue to receive federal money for Medicaid programs. 

 When does estate recovery apply? 

 ​Estate recovery applies only when OHP has paid for some or all of the cost of a member's long-term care using Medicaid funds. Long-term care can be:
 An assisted living facility 
 A residential care facility 
 An adult foster home 
 In-home care 
 A nursing facility 
 An intermediate care facility for people with intellectual or developmental disabilities or
 Other similar long-term care. ​

 What benefits are recoverable? 

 ​All Medicaid benefits paid since age 55 during the member's long-term care, such as:
 All long-term care benefits 
 Provider payments for services received on a fee-for-service basis 
 Monthly fees paid to a coordinated care organization 
 Medicare copays, coinsurance, premiums and deductibles paid before Jan. 1, 2010 and
  The monthly fee that OHA paid to Medicare for the member's Part D prescription coverage. 

 If the OHP member was married: 

 ​ODHS will not make a claim to recover Medicaid benefits until the OHP member's spouse dies. After that, ODHS will make the claim against the spouse's estate to the extent allowed by law. ​

 If the OHP member was in a domestic partnership: 

 ​Contact the Estate Administration Unit to learn more. ​

 If the OHP member has any children: 

 ​ODHS will not make a claim to recover Medicaid benefits if any living children are:
 Under age 21 or 
 Blind or permanently and totally disabled. The disability must meet the Social Security Administration's definition of permanent and total disability. 
 This only applies to the OHP member's natural or legally adopted children.​

 If the OHP member is American Indian or Alaska Native: 

 ​ODHS will not make a claim to recover Medicaid benefits from tribal resources, such as:
 Interest and income from tribal land or resources 
 Tribal property, including tribal property in or near a recognized reservation or ` Items of unique religious, spiritual, traditional and cultural significance. 
 To learn more, see Oregon Administrative Rule 461-135-0837 . ​

 Hardship waivers 

 ​Any person receiving money or valuables after the OHP member dies may ask ODHS to waive estate recovery. The person must meet the requirements of a hardship waiver. There are important deadlines for hardship waivers. Please contact the Estate Administration Unit right away. ​

 To learn more about estate recovery 

 ​This is a summary of how estate recovery works for benefits received on or after Oct. 1, 2013. The law and rules may change without warning. To learn more, such as how it works for Medicaid benefits received before Oct. 1, 2013:
 Read the Estate Recovery Program brochure ( MSC 9093 ).
 Also see Oregon Administrative Rules 461-135-0832 to 461-135-0847 .

 If you still have questions:

 ​Contact ODHS Estate Administration Unit:

 P.O. Box 14021, Salem, OR 97301
800-826-5675 (toll-free inside Oregon)
503-378-2884 / TTY: 711
 Fax: 503-378-3137​

 Medical Support

 If a child living in your home is on OHP and one or both parents are not living with you, you gave the state permission to: 
 Find out about your child's absent parent(s) and
 Sign up your child for the parent's health insurance or have the parent(s) pay for the child's OHP coverage. 
 If you have safety concerns about absent parents, tell us not to contact them. To do this, call ONE Customer Service at 800-699-9075 (TTY 711). 

 Personal Injury or Accidents 
 If you have a claim or intend to file a claim for an accident, injury or medical malpractice, please tell us right away. 
 Filing a claim means that someone else might need to pay back OHP for any health care payments related to your claim. 
 This could be from their private insurance, car insurance or another source. 
 This applies from the date of your injury to the date the claim is paid. 
 If you are in a coordinated care organization (CCO), you must also tell the CCO about the claim.

 If you do not tell us about a claim or any payments you get from a claim:
 OHA or your CCO may take legal action against you. We may file suit or seek an overpayment against you, or you may lose your benefits. 
 To report a personal injury claim:
 Report current claims or your intent to file a claim at www.reportinjury.org . 
 If you have questions:

 Contact ODHS Personal Injury Liens Unit:

 P.O. Box 14512, Salem, OR 97309
 Toll-free 800-377-3841 
503-378-4514 (Sal em) 
TTY 711  

 OHP.Oregon.gov

 Home 

 Member Resources

 OHP contacts 

 OHP handbooks 

 Words to know 

 Payment Information
 To learn how to send payments, 
 visit the ODHS website .

 Questions?
 We want to make sure you have the information you need. 

 Talk to your CCO 

  Not in a CCO? Call 1-800-273-0557 or

  Ask OHP  

 Footer 

 Oregon Health Authority 

   Find us on Facebook 
   Follow us on Twitter 
   Website Feedback ​

 Contact Us 
 ​
 Media 

 Request Public Records 

 Director's Office 

​​ 

 Questions about the Oregon Health Plan? 

 To learn more about your new benefits, your welcome packet, and what to do if you have an urgent health care issue please visit the 
 New to Oregon Health Plan​  web page​.

 ​ 

 Access 

 Language Access 

 Digital Accessibility 

 Nondiscrimination Policy 

 ADA Policy and Request for Modification 

 Notice of Privacy Practices 

 ​ 

 About Oregon 

  Back to Top 

 Oregon Health Authority 

 × 

 How to recognize an official Oregon website

 .gov 

 Official websites use .gov

 A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.

 Secure .gov websites use HTTPS

 A lock icon ( ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website.

 Only share sensitive information on official, secure websites.

 Close 

 Hidden Submit 

 Your browser is out-of-date! It has known security flaws and may not display all features of this and other websites. Learn how 

 ×
