Source URL: https://www.pacodeandbulletin.gov/Display/pacode?file=/secure/pacode/data/055/chapter258/s258.9.html&d=reduce
Retrieved: 2026-09-23

55 Pa. Code § 258.9. Liability of transferees. 

 Skip to main content 

 HOME 

 SEARCH 

 Pennsylvania Bulletin 

 Pennsylvania Code 

 Search Tips 

 ABOUT 

 CONTACT 

 FAQ 

 ALERTS 

 Pennsylvania
Code
--> 

 C OMMONWEALTH OF 

 P ENNSYLVANIA 

 C OMMONWEALTH OF 

 P ENNSYLVANIA 

 No statutes or acts will be found at this website.

 The Pennsylvania Code website reflects the Pennsylvania Code 
 changes effective through 56 Pa.B. 4026 (July 4, 2026). 

 About the Pennsylvania Code & Bulletin 

 • No statutes or acts will be found at this website.

 The Pennsylvania Code website reflects the Pennsylvania Code changes effective through 56 Pa.B. 4026 (July 4, 2026).

 Previous Doc

 Next Doc

 Chapter 258 Contents

 Title 55 Contents

 Search

 Enter Full Screen

 Previous Doc

 Next Doc

 Chapter 258 Contents

 Title 55 Contents

 Search

 Print

 Enter Full Screen

 Title 55 
   Chapter 258 
  55 Pa. Code § 258.9. Liability of transferees.

 55 Pa. Code § 258.9. Liability of transferees. 

 § 258.9.  Liability of transferees.

  (a)  A transferee is liable to pay the Department’s claim when he receives property subject to the Department’s claim for which he did not pay fair market value. The transferee’s liability is limited to the difference between the fair market value of the property that was not protected and the amount of money received by the estate in exchange for the transfer, if any.

  (b)  When the Department’s claim is postponed, a transferee is personally liable to pay the Department’s claim if the transferee receives property subject to the Department’s claim and the transferee fails to protect the Department’s claim during the postponement period. The transferee’s liability is limited to the fair market value of the property that was not protected.

  (c)  The arms length sale of the decedent’s real property at fair market value by the personal representative to a party unrelated to the decedent or the personal representative shall be deemed to be supported by valuable and adequate consideration.

 Cross References 

    This section cited in 55 Pa. Code §  258.12 (relating to administrative enforcement).

 No part of the information on this site may be reproduced for profit or sold for profit.

This material has been drawn directly from the official Pennsylvania Code full text database. Due to the limitations of HTML or differences in display capabilities of different browsers, this version may differ slightly from the official printed version.

 Top 
 Bottom 

 No part of the information on this site may be reproduced forprofit or sold for profit. Please direct comments or questions to webmaster@PaBulletin.com 

 Accessibility 

 Privacy 

 Disclaimer 

 Style Manual 

 Code Publication Schedule 

 Bulletin Publication Schedule 

 Accessibility  |  
 Privacy  |  
 Disclaimer  |  
 Style Manual  |  
 Code Publication Schedule  |  
 Bulletin Publication Schedule
