Source URL: https://www.law.cornell.edu/regulations/rhode-island/210-RICR-50-00-6.9
Retrieved: 2026-09-23

210 R.I. Code R. 210-RICR-50-00-6.9 - Asset Transfers Involving Life Estates | State Regulations | US Law | LII / Legal Information Institute 

 Please help us improve our site!

 × 

 No thank you 

 Skip to main content 

 Cornell Law
 School 
 Search
 Cornell 

 Toggle navigation 

 Please help
 us improve our site! 

 Support Us! 

 Search 

 About
 LII 

 Who We Are 

 What We Do 

 Who Pays For This 

 Contact Us 

 Get the
 law 

 Constitution 

 Supreme Court 

 U.S. Code 

 CFR 

 Federal Rules 

 Federal Rules of Appellate Procedure 

 Federal Rules of Civil Procedure 

 Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure 

 Federal Rules of Evidence 

 Federal Rules of Bankruptcy Procedure 

 U.C.C. 

 Law by jurisdiction 

 State law 

 Uniform laws 

 Federal law 

 World law 

 Lawyer directory 

 Legal encyclopedia 

 Business law 

 Constitutional law 

 Criminal law 

 Family law 

 Employment law 

 Money and Finances 

 More... 

 Help out 

 Give 

 Sponsor 

 Advertise 

 Create 

 Promote 

 Join Lawyer Directory 

 LII 

 State Regulations 

 Rhode Island Administrative Code 

 Title 210 - Executive Office of Health and Human Services 

 Chapter 50 - Medicaid Long-Term Services and Supports 

 Subchapter 00 - Long-Term Services 

 Part 6 - Medicaid Long-Term Services and Supports: Financial Eligibility 

 210 R.I. Code R. 210-RICR-50-00-6.9 - Asset Transfers Involving Life Estates

 210 R.I. Code R. 210-RICR-50-00-6.9 - Asset Transfers Involving Life Estates 

 State Regulations 

 Compare

 A. 
 Life estate means a legal arrangement entitling the owner of the life estate
 (sometimes referred to as the "life tenant") to possess, rent, and otherwise
 profit from real or personal property during their lifetime. The amount of a
 life estate that is countable depends on when it was established, whether the
 applicant(s) have the legal right to sell the home, and the portion of the
 proceeds of the sale, if allowed, that are available.

 B. For all Medicaid LTSS applications and
 renewals after January 1, 2006, the establishment of a life estate for a home
 is treated as a transfer of assets. 1. 
 Disqualifying transfer - A life estate may be a disqualifying transfer in the
 following instances: a. Applicant/beneficiary
 owns the property - When an applicant or beneficiary has an ownership interest
 in a home and establishes the life estate on his or her own behalf, the
 remainder interest is a disqualifying transfer. The remainder interest is the
 equity value of the property minus the value of the life estate as determined
 in accordance with §
 6.3 (B)(3) of
 this Part.

 b. Applicant/beneficiary
 purchases property - When an applicant/beneficiary purchases a life estate in
 the home of another person, and the payment made exceeds the FMV of the life
 estate, the difference between the amount paid and the FMV is treated as a
 disqualifying transfer. This transfer is disqualifying even if the
 applicant/beneficiary lives in the home of the life estate for one (1) year or
 more.

 c. Applicant/beneficiary
 gifts the property - In instances in which the applicant/beneficiary makes a
 gift or transfer of a life estate interest, the value of the life estate, as
 calculated under §
 6.3 (B)(3) of
 this Part, is considered a disqualifying transfer of assets.

 2. Allowed transfer - When an
 applicant or beneficiary establishes a life estate for fair market value, the
 purchase price is an allowed transfer if he or she resides in the home for at
 least one (1) year after the life estate is established. If the home held in
 the life estate is not excluded in accordance with the provisions set forth in
 §§
 6.3 (B)(1) and
 (2) of this Part, the value of the life
 estate is counted as a resource in determining Medicaid LTSS
 eligibility.

 C. A home
 held in a life estate may be excluded as a resource for Medicaid LTSS
 eligibility determination, providing the provisions of §
 6.3 (B)(3) of
 this Part have been met.

 6.9.1 
 Life Estate with Enhanced Powers 
 A. A deed containing a life estate with
 enhanced powers is also known as an "enhanced life estate deed" or a "Ladybird
 deed." An enhanced life estate deed permits a person to reserve the rights to
 sell, convey, mortgage, revoke, amend, and otherwise dispose of the property
 while alive. Upon the life estate holder's death, the life estate passes to a
 remainderman, without the need for probate. The deed specifies who will become
 the owner of the property upon death.

 B. On or after July 1, 2014, an applicant or
 beneficiary who holds a life estate with enhanced powers that serves as a
 primary residence is ineligible for Medicaid LTSS, unless or until the
 applicant/beneficiary: 1. Conveyance of the
 remainder interest - Exercises the retained power to convey all outstanding
 remainder interest to him or herself.

 2. Basis of the transfer - Uses a warranty
 deed or quitclaim deed created, executed, and recorded to transfer the
 remainder interest.

 3. Ownership -
 Holds the real estate, free and simple with no encumbrances.

 C. Upon assuming ownership of the
 remainder interest, a determination of whether the home exclusion applies is
 made in accordance with §
 6.3 of this Part if the
 applicant or beneficiary is otherwise eligible.

 D. An applicant or beneficiary who has a
 reserved a life estate with enhanced powers with retained rights to revoke,
 amend, or re-designate the remainderman by a deed created, executed, and
 recorded prior to July 1, 2014 is not denied Medicaid eligibility based on that
 deed, regardless of whether the remainderman designated is a person or persons,
 a trust, or other entity.

 Notes

 210 
 R.I. Code R.
 210-RICR-50-00-6.9 

 Adopted
 effective 1/20/2019 
Amended effective
 7/21/2021 

 State regulations are updated quarterly; we currently have two versions available.
 Below is a comparison between our most recent version and the prior quarterly release. 
 More comparison features will be added as we have more versions to compare.

 No prior version found.

 State Regulations Toolbox

 Accessibility 

 About LII 

 Contact us 

 Advertise here 

 Help 

 Terms of use 

 Privacy
