Source URL: https://risos-apa-production-public.s3.amazonaws.com/EOHHS/REG_11841_20211214161030.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-09-23

210-RICR-10-00-4

TITLE 210 - EXECUTIVE OFFICE OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES
CHAPTER 10 - EOHHS GENERAL PROVISIONS

SUBCHAPTER 00 - GENERAL PROVISIONS

Part 4 - Collections and Payments: Liens and Recovery of Medicaid Payments

4.1   LEGAL authority
      In accordance with federal mandates and R.I. Gen. Laws § 40-8-15, this lien and
      recovery regulation applies to the estates of recipients, whether categorically or
      medically needy, fifty-five (55) years of age or older at the time of receipt of
      Medicaid.

4.2   OVERVIEW
A.    A lien shall attach against property, which is included or includable in the
      decedent’s probate estate, regardless of whether or not a probate proceeding
      has been commenced in a probate court. Such a lien shall only be effective upon
      proper prior notice and if the lien is recorded in the land evidence records in
      accordance with R.I. Gen. Laws § 40-8-15.

B.    This Part, as it applies to all probate proceeding of a decedent aged fifty-five
      years (55) or older, shall include voluntary informal probate proceedings and any
      references to an executor or administrator shall include, without limitation, a
      voluntary executor or voluntary administrator.

4.3   Definitions
A.    As used in this section, the following terms shall be construed as follows:

      1.     "Estate", with respect to a deceased individual, means all real and
             personal property and other assets included or includable within the
             individual's probate estate.

      2.     “Executive Office of Health and Human Services" or "EOHHS” means the
             state agency established in 2006 under the provisions of R.I. Gen. Laws
             Chapter 42-7.2 et seq. within the executive branch of state government
             and serves as the principal agency for the purposes of managing the
             Departments of Children, Youth, and Families (DCYF); Health (DOH);
             Human Services (DHS); and Behavioral Healthcare, Developmental
             Disabilities, and Hospitals (BHDDH). The EOHHS is designated as the
             “single state agency,” authorized under Title XIX of the U.S. Social


                                            1
             Security Act (42 U.S.C. § 1396a et seq.) and, as such, is legally
             responsible for the program / fiscal management and administration of the
             Medicaid Program.

4.4   APPLICATION OF THE LIEN
A.    The lien shall apply to the individual's estate which includes all real and personal
      property and other assets that are included or includable within the individual's
      probate estate. Consequently, an individual's probate estate may be comprised
      of liquid assets as well as real property, including any resources remaining at the
      time of death which were allowable in the individual's Medicaid eligibility
      determination.

B.    Other than as provided in § 4.15 of this Part, a lien cannot attach to assets which
      are not the subject of a probate estate initiated within the State of Rhode Island,
      or in any other state in which the individual was a domiciliary. Real or personal
      property which passes by operation of law, or passes to beneficiaries under a
      contract, deed, annuity, or other instruments such as trust agreements or
      insurance policies, or any other property which does not require the initiation of a
      probate process to convey title or beneficial interests or ownership to others, is
      excluded from the lien process.

C.    The lien shall attach against property of a beneficiary, which is included or
      includable in the decedent’s probate estate, regardless of whether or not a
      probate proceeding has been commenced in the probate court by EOHHS or by
      any other party. Provided, however that such lien shall only attach and shall only
      be effective against the beneficiary’s real property included or includable in the
      beneficiary’s probate estate upon proper prior notice and if such lien is recorded
      in the land evidence records and is in accordance with R.I. Gen. Laws § 40-8-15.
      Decedents who have received Medicaid are subject to the assignment and
      subrogation provisions of R.I. Gen. Laws §§ 40-6-9 and 40-6-10.

D.    The lien for the recovery of Medicaid expenditures:

      1.     Does not attach during the beneficiary’s lifetime;

      2.     Does not attach to any real or personal property that is not included or
             includable in the deceased Medicaid beneficiary’s probate estate.

E.    The lien for the recovery of Medicaid expenditures:

      1.     Does cover all periods of receipt of Medicaid from and after age fifty-five
             (55).

      2.     The recipient does not have to be receiving Medicaid at the time of death.

      3.     Does attach at death to all assets included or includable within the
             individual's probate estate. That is, any and all assets that are subject to

                                            2
             Probate or to assets where there is no probate due to the use of the
             Rhode Island "small estates" statute (R.I. Gen. Laws § 33-24-1 et seq.).

      4.     Does attach to and remain a lien upon the estate property, whether or not
             the property is transferred, and upon all property acquired by the executor
             or administrator in substitution therefore while that property remains in his
             or her hands until the Medicaid is paid, but the lien shall not affect any
             tangible personal property or intangible personal property after it has
             passed to a bona fide purchaser for value. If there are questions
             concerning the passage to a bona fide purchaser, the case will be referred
             to the EOHHS Legal Office as referenced in § 4.5 of this Part.

      5.     Notice of said lien shall be sent to the duly appointed executor or
             administrator, the decedent’s legal representative, if known, or to the
             decedent’s next of kin or heirs at law as stated in the decedent’s last
             application for Medicaid, thirty (30) days prior to filing in the land evidence
             records. Said notice shall include appeal rights as noted in § 4.11 of this
             Part.

4.5   REQUIREMENTS FOR TRANSFER/SALE OF PROPERTY
A.    Whenever an individual who is receiving Medicaid, transfers an interest in real or
      personal property on or after July 1, 2012, such individual shall notify the EOHHS
      within ten (10) days of the transfer:

      1.     EOHHS Legal Office, Virks Building, 3 West Road, Cranston, RI 02920

B.    Such notice shall also be sent to the individual’s local office. The notice shall
      include, at a minimum, the individual’s name, social security number or, if
      different, the EOHHS identification number, the date of transfer and the dollar
      value, if any, paid or received by the individual who received benefits, and the
      name of the person and relationship of the person to whom the transfer was
      made.

C.    In the event a Medicaid beneficiary fails to provide the required notice of the
      transfer to EOHHS and in the event the beneficiary, his/her guardian,
      conservator or agent under a power of attorney, if applicable, his/her spouse
      and/or immediate family members knew or should have known that such
      individual failed to provide such notice and that person(s) receives any
      distribution of less than fair market value as a result of the transfer, he or she
      shall be liable to the EOHHS to the extent of the uncompensated value of the
      transfer, up to the amount of Medicaid benefits paid on behalf of the beneficiary.

D.    Moreover, any such individual shall be subject to the provisions of R.I. Gen. Laws
      § 40-6-15 and any remedy provided by applicable state and federal laws and
      rules and regulations. Failure to comply with the notice requirements set forth in
      the section shall not affect the marketability of title to real estate transferred.

                                             3
4.6   EXCEPTIONS TO THE LIEN
A.    A lien shall not apply:

      1.     For periods of receipt of Medicaid before the beneficiary reached the age
             of fifty-five (55).

      2.     If the beneficiary is survived by:

             a.     A spouse; or

             b.     A child who is under the age of twenty-one (21); or

             c.     A child who is blind or permanently and totally disabled as defined
                    in Title XVI (SSI) of the Social Security Act.

B.    An individual who is a survivor of the deceased beneficiary, as described above,
      need not be residing in property of the estate or be a beneficiary of the estate.

C.    Receipt of SSI, RSDI or Railroad Retirement (RR) benefits is acceptable
      evidence of disability. However, if the child is not in receipt of such benefits, the
      characteristic of disability must be determined by EOHHS.

4.7   REDUCTIONS OF THE LIEN UNDER QLTCIP PROGRAM
A.    RI has established a Qualified Long-Term Care Insurance Partnership (QLTCIP)
      program. This Qualified LTC Insurance Partnership provides:

      1.     For the disregard of a Medicaid applicant's resources in an amount equal
             to the benefits paid by their QLTCIP policy as of the time of their
             application for Medicaid; and

      2.     For the total amount paid by the individual's QLTCIP policy at the time of
             death to be disregarded in the determination of the amount to be
             recovered from a beneficiary's estate.

      3.     The amount that will be protected during estate recovery is the same
             amount that was disregarded in the eligibility determination. (There may
             be continuing QLTCIP policy payments after Medicaid eligibility is
             established, so if the person later gains assets, he/she may have more
             protected than he/she had at the time of eligibility).

      4.     Thus, the total amount paid by the individual's QLTCIP at the time of death
             is to be disregarded in the determination of the amount to be recovered
             from a beneficiary's estate.




                                             4
4.8   CLIENT NOTIFICATION
      During application for Medicaid for the individual who is fifty-five (55) or older at
      the time of application or who will turn fifty-five (55) before renewal, the
      individual, or his/her representative, must be advised that, under Rhode Island
      law, receipt of Medicaid may constitute a lien upon his/her estate. Similarly, at
      renewal for Medicaid for an individual who is fifty-five (55) years of age or older
      or who will become fifty-five (55) before the next renewal, it must be explained to
      such individual that the lien is an attachment against the individual's estate,
      taking effect at death, which allows EOHHS to recover from the individual's
      estate any Medicaid paid on behalf of the individual from the time s/he became
      fifty-five (55) years of age (and after the effective date of the law). The exceptions
      in § 4.6 of this Part relative to certain survivors must be explained to the
      applicant.

4.9   RECOVERY
A.    Based on the information regarding the deceased's resources and the assistance
      which would by law be recovered, a decision regarding recovery is made by
      EOHHS.

B.    EOHHS Recovery Practices:

      1.     Upon the filing of a petition for admission to probate of a decedent’s will or
             for administration of a decedent’s estate, when the decedent was fifty-five
             (55) years or older at the time of death, a copy of said petition and a copy
             of the death certificate shall be sent to the EOHHS:

             a.     EOHHS Legal Office, Virks Building, 3 West Road, Cranston, RI
                    02920.

      2.     The notice requirements of this section are in addition to any notice that
             may be required pursuant to R.I. Gen. Laws § 33-11-5.1 entitled “Duty to
             notify known or reasonably ascertainable creditors.”

      3.     If the EOHHS requests additional information, an executor or administrator
             shall complete and send to EOHHS a form prescribed by that office and
             shall provide such additional information within thirty (30) days of the
             request. Petitioners shall maintain documentation evidencing notice to the
             EOHHS Legal Office and file a copy of this notice with the probate court
             prior to hearing. In the case of a voluntary probate proceeding, since there
             is no hearing, a copy of the notice to EOHHS shall be filed with the
             probate court with the voluntary petition.

      4.     For estates open on or after July 1, 2012, should a petitioner fail to send a
             copy of the petition and a copy of the death certificate to the EOHHS
             Legal Office and a decedent has received Medicaid for which the EOHHS

                                             5
            is authorized to recover, no distribution and/or payments, including
            Administration fees, shall be disbursed. Any person and/or entity that
            receives a distribution of assets from the decedent’s estate shall be liable
            to the EOHHS to the extent of such distribution.

     5.     Compliance with the provisions of this section shall be consistent with the
            requirements set forth in R.I. Gen. Laws § 33-11-5 and the requirements
            of the affidavit of notice set forth in R.I. Gen. Laws § 33-11-5.2. Nothing in
            these sections shall limit the EOHHS from recovery, to the extent of the
            distribution, in accordance with all state and federal laws.

     6.     EOHHS initiates estate recoveries upon receipt of information (from
            internal or external sources) relative to the death of a Medicaid beneficiary
            who was at least fifty-five (55) years of age, and responds to requests
            from estate representatives to release and/or discharge liens upon
            payment of reimbursable amounts.

C.   EOHHS does not automatically file an encumbrance in the land evidence
     records.

D.   Usually, the recovery process begins with a letter to the next of kin or legal
     representatives requesting estate asset information. In most cases, there are no
     assets left after payment of funeral expenses and other preferred debts (R.I.
     Gen. Laws § 33-12-11) and no recovery is pursued by the EOHHS. If requested,
     EOHHS will issue a discharge of lien. If there are any assets remaining to pay
     the EOHHS claim, in whole or in part, EOHHS will request reimbursement by
     letter which provides an accounting of the Medicaid expenditures. Upon receipt
     of payment, EOHHS will issue a discharge of lien.

E.   If the EOHHS is notified of the pendency of a probate estate either in response to
     a written notice from the executor/administrator, (see R.I. Gen. Laws § 33-11-5.1
     for notice to creditor requirements), the EOHHS Legal Office will file a formal
     claim in the estate. Land evidence lien notices are not normally filed at this time.

4.10 DISCHARGE OF LIEN
A.   EOHHS will issue a discharge of its lien in each of the following situations:

     1.     Upon payment in full of its claim;

     2.     Upon payment of its claim in part by payment to EOHHS of all remaining
            estate assets after allowance for the preferences outlined in R.I. Gen.
            Laws § 33-12-11 and any court-approved expenses relating to any pre-
            existing guardianship or conservatorship of the decedent.

            a.     EOHHS does not "compromise" or reduce its claim except as
                   provided above;


                                           6
            b.     EOHHS will require the sale or liquidation of non-liquid assets;

     3.     Upon determination that §§ 4.10(A)(1) and (2) if this Part above are
            satisfied and the lien is recorded in the land evidence records.

4.11 DISCHARGE OF INAPPLICABLE RECORDED LIEN
A.   EOHHS will issue a discharge of a recorded lien upon a determination by
     EOHHS that the lien is inapplicable. Inapplicability occurs in the following
     situations:

     1.     If there is a statutory exception as found in § 4.6 of this Part; or

     2.     The decedent was never a beneficiary of Medicaid, was not age fifty-five
            (55), or was receiving Medicaid but was not "Medically Needy" or
            "Categorically Needy" during the relevant time periods; or

     3.     The EOHHS received reimbursement from another third-party source or
            insurer; or

     4.     No assets are included or includable in the decedent's probate estate; or

     5.     There is no required form to request a discharge of an inapplicable lien. A
            written request for discharge should be sent to:

            a.     EOHHS, Virks Building, 3 West Road Cranston, RI 02920 and
                   should contain, at a minimum:

                   (1)    A copy of the Death Certificate;

                   (2)    The decedent's Social Security Number;

                   (3)    A detailed explanation of the basis for a finding of
                          inapplicability, with appropriate documentation for the
                          finding. Acceptable documentation may include affidavits;

                   (4)    A description of the real estate (tax assessor's plat/lot
                          numbers and street address).

B.   EOHHS will review and verify the information and will compare with information
     previously disclosed on Medicaid applications on file with the EOHHS. If
     approved, EOHHS will issue and record a discharge of lien within forty-five (45)
     days of receipt of the request for discharge due to inapplicability or refer the
     request to the EOHHS Legal Office, if necessary. Any interested party who
     disputes the applicability of the land records lien, within thirty (30) days of the
     proper prior notice as provided in § 4.4 of this Part shall be afforded an
     opportunity to request an administration hearing (R.I. Gen. Laws § 42-35-9).


                                            7
4.12 UNDUE HARDSHIP CONSIDERATION
A.   EOHHS may make adjustments to and settle estate liens to obtain the fullest
     amount practicable.

B.   A lien may be postponed in whole or in part when EOHHS determines execution
     of the lien would work an undue hardship.

C.   An undue hardship may be found to exist and execution of the lien may be
     postponed if a sale of real property, in the case of an individual's home, would be
     required to satisfy a claim, if all of the following conditions are met.

D.   An heir or beneficiary may request that the EOHHS delay the execution of its lien
     if:

     1.    An individual was using the property as a principal place of residence on
           the date of the recipient's death; and

     2.    That individual resided in the decedent's home on a continual basis for at
           least twenty-four (24) months immediately prior to the date of the
           deceased recipient's death; and

     3.    That individual has, from the time EOHHS first presented its claim for
           recovery against the deceased recipient's estate and after, annual gross
           income in an amount not to exceed 250 percent (250%) of the then
           applicable federal poverty level (FPL) income standard based on the same
           family size, and assets not to exceed the then applicable Medically Needy
           resource standards.

E.   If an individual meets the above criteria, the heir(s) or beneficiary(ies) may
     submit a request to the EOHHS Legal Office for consideration of undue hardship
     and the delay of the execution of EOHHS’s lien against the property if it appears
     that the individual is able to continue to reside in the property.

F.   Requests for consideration of undue hardship will be reviewed by a team of three
     members therein designated by the Medicaid Director. The review team will
     render decisions by giving due consideration to the equities involved as well as
     the obligations of the parties involved.

G.   Additionally, undue hardship will be determined by EOHHS on a case-by-case
     basis and will include, but will not be limited to, the following:

     1.    Be rendered homeless without the resources to find suitable housing; or

     2.    Lose his/her means of livelihood; or

     3.    Be deprived of food, clothing, shelter, or medical care such that life would
           be endangered should a finding of undue hardship be denied.

                                          8
4.13 APPLICATION FOR UNDUE HARDSHIP CONSIDERATION
A.   A requestor shall mail his or her application for an undue hardship consideration
     in writing to EOHHS within forty-five (45) days after the date EOHHS has filed its
     claim with probate court. The application shall include the following information:

     1.     The relationship of the undue hardship applicant to the decedent and
            copies of documents establishing that relationship; and

     2.     The basis for the application and documentation supporting the undue
            hardship applicant's position; and

     3.     Supporting documentation that the requestor has the legal standing and
            will be allowed to continue to reside in the property indefinitely should the
            undue hardship request be approved.

B.   EOHHS may require additional documentation, such as a current title
     examination or a list of existing creditors, as adequate proof that its decision to
     defer its lien will not otherwise adversely affect its claim.

C.   EOHHS shall review each application and issue a written decision within ninety
     (90) days after the application was received by EOHHS. EOHHS shall consider
     and base its decision on all information received with the application and any
     independent investigation it may undertake.

D.   The decision shall be the final decision of EOHHS.

4.14 UNDUE HARDSHIP GRANTED
A.   If EOHHS finds that an undue hardship exists, the execution of the lien is
     delayed for as long as:

     1.     The undue hardship grantee is alive and residing in the property; and has
            income and assets not to exceed the amounts specified in this Part.

     2.     The undue hardship circumstances upon which the decision is based
            continue to exist; and

     3.     As long as the property is adequately maintained and continues to exist in
            its then current state.

B.   The circumstances of the hardship will be subject to review by EOHHS at least
     every two years; provided however, that the grantee must notify EOHHS of any
     material change in circumstances, income and/or assets.




                                           9
4.15 TRANSFER/SALE OF PROPERTY UNDER HARDSHIP
    If the owner of the property sells or transfers ownership of the home, EOHHS will
    execute the lien.




                                        1
                                        0
210-RICR-10-00-4
TITLE 210 - EXECUTIVE OFFICE OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES
CHAPTER 10 - EOHHS GENERAL PROVISIONS
SUBCHAPTER 00 - GENERAL PROVISIONS
PART 4 - “COLLECTIONS AND PAYMENTS: LIENS AND RECOVERY OF MEDICAID
PAYMENTS” (FORMERLY MEDICAID CODE OF ADMINISTRATIVE RULES,
SECTION # 0312) (210-RICR-10-00-4)

Type of Filing: Refile Capabilities




Department of State
   01/04/2022                         N/A


_________________________________________________________________
  Regulation Effective Date        Original Signing Date
    E-SIGNED by Department of State
      on 2021-12-14 16:10:28 EST      December 14, 2021


_________________________________________________________________
  Department of State Initials     Department of State Date

