Source URL: https://www.scstatehouse.gov/sess125_2023-2024/bills/5189.htm
Retrieved: 2026-09-23

2023-2024 Bill 5189: Property transfer upon death - South Carolina Legislature Online 

 South Carolina General Assembly 
125th Session, 2023-2024
 Download This Bill in Microsoft Word Format
 Indicates Matter Stricken 
 Indicates New Matter 
 H. 5189
 STATUS INFORMATION
 General Bill
Sponsors: Rep. Burns
Companion/Similar bill(s): 755
Document Path: LC-0370PH24.docx

 Introduced in the House on February 29, 2024
 Judiciary 
Summary: Property transfer upon death HISTORY OF LEGISLATIVE ACTIONS
 Date Body Action Description with journal page number 
 2/29/2024 House Introduced and read first time ( House Journal-page 5 ) 
 2/29/2024 House Referred to Committee on Judiciary ( House Journal-page 5 ) 
 View the latest legislative information at the website
 VERSIONS OF THIS BILL
 02/29/2024 

 A bill

 TO AMEND THE SOUTH CAROLINA CODE OF LAWS BY ADDING PART 4 
TO ARTICLE 6, CHAPTER 6, TITLE 62 SO AS TO PROVIDE FOR TRANSFER ON DEATH 
DESIGNATIONS FOR CERTAIN CATEGORIES OF TITLED PERSONAL PROPERTY; BY AMENDING 
SECTION 50-23-60 , RELATING TO APPLICATIONS FOR CERTIFICATE OF TITLE FOR 
WATERCRAFT OR OUTBOARD MOTORS, SO AS TO PROVIDE FOR TRANSFER ON DEATH 
DESIGNATIONS; BY AMENDING SECTION 50-23-70 , RELATING TO FEES FOR WATERCRAFT AND 
OUTBOARD MOTOR CERTIFICATES OF TITLE, SO AS TO ESTABLISH A FEE FOR TRANSFER ON 
DEATH DESIGNATIONS; BY AMENDING SECTION 50-23-90 , RELATING TO THE CONTENTS OF 
WATERCRAFT AND OUTBOARD MOTOR  CERTIFICATES OF TITLE, SO AS TO REQUIRE CERTAIN 
INFORMATION REGARDING TRANSFER ON DEATH DESIGNATIONS; BY AMENDING SECTION 
50-23-130, RELATING TO TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OF WATERCRAFT AND OUTBOARD MOTORS 
BY OPERATION OF LAW, SO AS TO INCLUDE TRANSFER ON DEATH DESIGNATIONS; BY 
AMENDING SECTION 56-19-290 , RELATING TO CONTENTS OF A CERTIFICATE OF TITLE 
ISSUED BY THE DEPARTMENT OF MOTOR VEHICLES, SO AS TO REQUIRE CERTAIN 
INFORMATION REGARDING TRANSFER ON DEATH DESIGNATIONS; BY AMENDING SECTION 
56-19-420, RELATING TO DEPARTMENT OF MOTOR VEHICLE FEES TO ISSUE OR TRANSFER A 
CERTIFICATE OF TITLE, SO AS TO ESTABLISH A FEE FOR TRANSFER ON DEATH 
DESIGNATIONS; AND BY AMENDING SECTION 62-6-101 , RELATING TO DEFINITIONS, SO AS 
TO REVISE AND INCLUDE CERTAIN DEFINITIONS PERTAINING TO TRANSFERS ON DEATH FOR 
TITLED PERSONAL PROPERTY. 

 B e it enacted by the 
General Assembly of the State of South Carolina:

 S ECTION 1.  A rticle 6, Chapter 6, Title 62 of the S.C. Code is 
amended by adding:

     P art 4

     T ransfers on Death for Titled Personal Property

     S ection 
62-6-401. (A) In addition to such other methods for 
registering and titling titled personal property as permitted in Title 50 and 
Title 56, any owner of a vehicle, mobile home, watercraft, outboard motor or 
any similar personal property for which legal titles are issued and 
administered by the Department of Motor Vehicles or Department of Natural 
Resources may establish a Transfer on Death (TOD) designation upon any such 
title or registration, subject to the provisions of this section, for the purposes 
set forth herein.

     ( B) A 
TOD designation on any titled personal property shall pass, upon the death of 
all owners of such titled personal property, to the TOD beneficiary or 
beneficiaries pursuant to this section and is effective by reason of this 
statute and such transfer is not testamentary or subject to Articles 1 through 
4 (estate administration).

     ( C) A 
beneficiary of a TOD designation on any titled personal property has no 
ownership of the titled personal property during the lifetime of the owner or 
owners of such titled personal property.

     ( D) The 
following rules shall apply to titled personal property owned by one owner with 
TOD designation:

        ( 1) 
On the death of an owner who is the sole owner of titled personal property with 
a TOD designation, the titled personal property belongs to the surviving 
beneficiary or beneficiaries named in the TOD designation. If two or more 
beneficiaries survive, the titled personal property must be titled to them in 
undivided equal shares, and there is no right of survivorship in the event of a 
later death of a beneficiary, unless such beneficiaries shall thereafter change 
the titling during their lifetimes to reflect such a right of survivorship.

        ( 2) 
If no beneficiary named on the TOD designation survives upon the death of the 
owner, then the titled personal property belongs to the estate of the owner.

        ( 3) 
Any sole owner who utilizes a TOD designation on titled personal property may 
revoke or modify the TOD designation at any time during the owner's life 
without the consent of any beneficiary listed on a TOD designation.

     ( E) The 
following rules shall apply to titled personal property owned by two or more 
owners with a TOD designation:

        ( 1) 
Only multiple owners who own titled personal property with right of 
survivorship shall be entitled to utilize a TOD designation to transfer 
property pursuant to this section and a TOD designation for multiple owners who 
own titled personal property without such right of survivorship shall be 
ineffective.

        ( 2) 
On the death of one owner among multiple owners with right of survivorship the 
titled personal property belongs to the surviving owner or owners. If two or 
more owners survive, the titled personal property belongs to the surviving 
owners in undivided equal shares and the right of survivorship continues 
between the surviving parties.

        ( 3) 
On the death of the last surviving owner among multiple owners with right of 
survivorship, the titled personal property belongs to the surviving beneficiary 
or beneficiaries named in a TOD designation. If two or more beneficiaries 
survive, the titled personal property belongs to them in undivided equal 
shares, and there is no right of survivorship in the event of a later death of 
a beneficiary, unless such beneficiaries shall thereafter change the titling to 
reflect such a right of survivorship during their lifetimes. If no beneficiary 
named in the TOD designation is living on the date of the last surviving 
owner's death, the titled personal property belongs to the estate of the last 
surviving owner.

        ( 4) 
When multiple owners own titled personal property, all of such multiple owners, 
or the survivors among them, must act together to establish such TOD 
designation or to thereafter revoke or modify such TOD designation, but the 
consent of any beneficiary selected in such TOD designation must not be 
required.

     ( F) An 
owner or multiple owners of a vehicle, mobile home, or any other similar 
vehicle or property for which the Department of Motor Vehicles issues and 
administers titles shall apply to the Department of Motor Vehicles for such TOD 
designation pursuant to the terms of this section pursuant to the rules and standards 
of the department.

     ( G) An 
owner or multiple owners of a watercraft, outboard motor, or any other similar 
watercraft or property for which the Department of Natural Resources issues and 
administers titles shall apply to the Department of Natural Resources for such 
TOD designation pursuant to the terms of this section pursuant to the rules and 
standards of the department.

     ( H) The 
Department of Motor Vehicles or the Department of Natural Resources, as 
appropriate, upon request, shall retitle the appropriate titled personal 
property with a TOD designation, to:

        ( 1) 
The beneficiary or beneficiaries named in the TOD designation, if proof of 
death is presented to the appropriate department showing that the beneficiary 
or beneficiaries survived all owners of the titled personal property.

        ( 2) 
The personal representative of a deceased party, if proof of death is presented 
to the appropriate department showing that the deceased party was the last 
survivor of all other owners named on the title to the titled personal property 
and there shall be no surviving beneficiaries named in any TOD designation.

        ( 3) 
To such party or parties in accordance with a court order directing the 
retitling of such titled personal property.

     ( I) For 
purposes of this section, ownership of titled personal property using "OR" with 
two or more multiple owners shall indicate "joint tenants with right of 
survivorship", while ownership using "AND" with two or more multiple owners 
shall indicate ownership "tenants in common". Only sole owners and multiple 
owners holding title to titled personal property with such right of 
survivorship (e.g., "OR" titling between multiple owners) are eligible to 
utilize the TOD procedures described in this statute.

 S ECTION 2.  S ection 50-23-60 (A) of the S.C. Code is amended to 
read:

     ( A) Every person who acquires a 
watercraft or outboard motor required to be titled under this chapter shall 
apply to the department within thirty days of the date of acquisition for a 
certificate of title for the watercraft or outboard motor accompanied by the 
required fee and on forms required by the department. The application must be 
signed by the person who acquires the watercraft or outboard motor and shall 
contain:

        ( 1) 
the applicant's name, domiciled address including the county, date of birth, 
and the county where the watercraft is principally located, state issued 
identification number, and state of issue;

        ( 2) 
for watercraft, a description of the watercraft, including its make, model, 
model year, length, the principal material used in construction, hull number, 
and the manufacturer's engine serial number if an inboard; for an outboard 
motor, its make, model, model year, or year of manufacture, and horsepower, and 
manufacturer's serial number;

        ( 3) 
the date of acquisition by the applicant, the name and address of the person 
from whom the watercraft or outboard motor was acquired, and the names and 
addresses of persons having a security interest in the order of their priority;

        ( 4) 
a bill of sale; and 

        ( 5) 
further information reasonably required by the department to enable it to 
determine whether the owner is entitled to a certificate of title and the 
existence or nonexistence of security interests in the watercraft or outboard 
motor ; 

        ( 6) when a Transfer of Death (TOD) 
beneficiary is designated, each TOD beneficiary's name, domiciled address 
including the county, date of birth, state-issued identification number, and 
state of issue; and 

        ( 7) in the case of one or more TOD 
beneficiaries receiving the title and registration to a watercraft or outboard 
motor, a bill of sale shall not be required for the department to issue a 
title, but such TOD beneficiaries shall establish the death of all owners of 
the watercraft or outboard motor .

 S ECTION 3.  S ection 50-23-70 of the S.C. Code is amended by adding:

     ( F) The fee to establish, modify, or 
revoke a Transfer of Death designation upon a certificate of title for 
watercraft or outboard motor is ten dollars.

 S ECTION 4.  S ection 50-23-90 (a) of the S.C. Code is amended to 
read:

     ( a) Each certificate of title issued by 
the department shall contain:

        ( 1) 
the date issued;

        ( 2) 
the name and address of the owner;

        ( 3) 
the names and addresses of any lienholders, in the order of priority as shown 
on the application or, if the application is based on a certificate of title, 
as shown on the certificate;

        ( 4) 
the title number assigned to the watercraft or outboard motor;

        ( 5) 
a description of the watercraft or outboard motor including its make, model, 
model year, or year of manufacture, horsepower, registration number, and 
manufacturer's serial number or, hull number assigned to the watercraft by the 
department, length, and the principal material used in construction;

        ( 6) 
on the reverse side of the certificate, spaces for assignment of title by the 
owner or by the dealer and for a warranty that the signer is the owner and that 
there are no mortgages, liens , or encumbrances on the watercraft or 
outboard motor except as are noted on the face of the certificate of title; and 

        ( 7) 
 information of whether Transfer of Death beneficiary 
designations have been filed with the department; and 

        ( 8) any other data the 
department prescribes.

 S ECTION 5.  S ection 50-23-130 (a) of the S.C. Code is amended to 
read:

     ( a) If the ownership of a watercraft 
or outboard motor is transferred by operation of law, such as by inheritance, Transfer on Death, devise or bequest, order in 
bankruptcy, insolvency, replevin, or execution sale, or satisfaction of 
mechanic's lien, or repossession upon default in performance of the terms of a 
security agreement, the transferee shall, except as provided in subsection (b), 
promptly mail or deliver to the department the last certificate of title, if 
available, or the manufacturer's or importer's statement of origin, or, if that 
is not possible, satisfactory proof of the transfer of ownership, and his 
application for a new certificate of title accompanied by the required fee, and 
upon the appropriate form or forms prescribed and furnished by the department.

 S ECTION 6.  S ection 56-19-290 of the S.C. Code is amended to read:

     S ection 
56-19-290. E ach certificate of title issued by the 
Department of Motor Vehicles shall contain:

     ( 1) the 
date issued;

     ( 2) the 
name and address of the owner;

     ( 3) the 
names and addresses of any lienholders, in the order of priority as shown on 
the application, and dates of the liens, or if the application is based on a 
certificate of title, as shown on the certificate;

     ( 4) the 
title number assigned to the vehicle;

     ( 5) a 
description of the vehicle including, so far as the following data exists:  its 
make, model, vehicle identification number, odometer reading at the time of 
application, and type of body;

     ( 6) the names of any Transfer on Death beneficiary established upon 
such title pursuant to Section 62-6-401 ; and 

     ( 7) any other data the department 
prescribes.

     T he certificate of 
title shall contain forms for assignment and warranty of title by the owner and 
for reassignment and warranty of title by a dealer and may contain forms for 
application for a certificate of title by a transferee, the naming of a lienholder 
and the assignment or release of the security interest of a lienholder.

 S ECTION 7.  S ection 56-19-420 (A) of the S.C. Code is amended to 
read:

     ( A) The Department of Motor Vehicles 
shall charge fifteen dollars for:

        ( 1) 
the issuance of a certificate of title;

        ( 2) 
the transfer of a certificate of title; or 

        ( 3) 
the issuance of a duplicate certificate of title ; or 

        ( 4) the establishment, modification, 
or revocation of Transfer on Death beneficiaries pursuant to Section 62-6-401 .

 S ECTION 8.  S ection 62-6-101 of the S.C. Code is amended to read:

     S ection 
62-6-101. I n this subpart:

     ( 1) 
"Account" means a contract of deposit between a depositor and a financial 
institution, and includes a checking account, savings account, certificate of 
deposit, share account, and other like arrangements.

     ( 2) 
"Agent" means a person authorized to make account transactions for a party.

     ( 3) 
"Beneficiary" means a person named as one to whom sums on deposit in an account 
are payable on request after the death of all parties or for whom a party is 
named as the trustee ; or, as it relates to titled personal 
property, any party named as one to whom a title shall be reregistered and 
retitled on request after the death of all owners of titled personal property .

     ( 4) 
"Financial institution" means any organization authorized to do business under 
state or federal laws relating to financial institutions, and includes a bank, 
trust company, savings bank, building and loan association, savings and loan 
company or association, and credit union.

     ( 5) 
"Multiple-party account" means an account payable on request to one or more of 
two or more parties, whether or not a right of survivorship is mentioned 
including, but not limited to, joint accounts or POD accounts.

     ( 6) 
"Net contribution of a party" means the sum of all deposits to an account made 
by or for the party, less all payments from the account made to or for the 
party which have not been paid to or applied to the use of another party and a 
proportionate share of any charges deducted from the account, plus a 
proportionate share of any interest or dividends earned, whether or not 
included in the current balance. The term includes deposit life insurance 
proceeds added to the account by reason of death of the party whose net 
contribution is in question.

     ( 7) 
"Party" means a person who, by the terms of an account, has a present right, 
subject to request, to payment from the account other than as a beneficiary or 
agent.

     ( 8) 
"Payment" of sums on deposit includes withdrawal, payment to a party, or third 
person pursuant to a check or other request, and a pledge of sums on deposit by 
a party, or a set-off, reduction, or other disposition of all or part of an 
account pursuant to a pledge.

     ( 9) 
"Proof of death" includes a death certificate or record or report which is 
prima facie proof of death under Section 62-1-507 .

     ( 10) 
"POD designation" means the designation of:  (i) a beneficiary in an account 
payable on request to one party during the party's lifetime and on the party's 
death to one or more beneficiaries, or to one or more parties during their 
lifetimes and on death of all of them to one or more beneficiaries, or (ii) a 
beneficiary in an account in the name of one or more parties as trustee for one 
or more beneficiaries if the relationship is established by the terms of the 
account and there is no subject of the trust other than the sums on deposit in 
the account, whether or not payment to the beneficiary is mentioned.

     ( 11) 
"Receive" as it relates to notice to a financial institution, means receipt in 
the office or branch office of the financial institution in which the account 
is established, but if the terms of the account require notice at a particular 
place, in the place required.

     ( 12) 
"Request" means a request for payment complying with all terms of the account, 
including special requirements concerning necessary signatures and regulations 
of the financial institution. However, for purposes of this subpart, if terms 
of the account condition payment on advance notice, a request for payment is 
treated as immediately effective and a notice of intent to withdraw is treated 
as a request for payment.

     ( 13) 
"Sums on deposit" means the balance payable on an account including interest 
and dividends earned, whether or not included in the current balance, and any 
deposit life insurance proceeds added to the account by reason of the death of 
a party.

     ( 14) 
"Terms of the account" includes the deposit agreement and other terms and 
conditions, including the form, of the contract of deposit.

     ( 15) "Owner" as it relates to titled 
personal property, means one or more parties with titled personal property 
registered and titled in such parties' respective name or names. 

     ( 16) "Transfer on Death" or "TOD" 
means the designation of a beneficiary named on titled personal property for 
purposes of reregistering and retitling such titled personal property in such 
beneficiary's or beneficiaries' name or names upon the death of the last 
surviving owner of such titled personal property. 

     ( 17) "Titled personal property" means 
any vehicle, mobile home, watercraft, outboard motor, or any other similar 
personal property for which the Department of Motor Vehicles or Department of 
Natural Resources issues and administers legal titles. 

 S ECTION 9.  This act takes effect upon approval 
by the Governor.

 ----XX----

 This web page was last updated on February 29, 2024 at 10:45 AM
