Source URL: https://publications.tnsosfiles.com/rules/1200/1200-13/1200-13-13.20251005.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-09-23

                                        RULES
                                          OF
                 THE TENNESSEE DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE AND ADMINISTRATION
                                  BUREAU OF TENNCARE

                                            CHAPTER 1200-13-13
                                            TENNCARE MEDICAID

                                            TABLE OF CONTENTS

1200-13-13-.01   Definitions                              1200-13-13-.09   Third Party Resources
1200-13-13-.02   Eligibility                              1200-13-13-.10   Exclusions
1200-13-13-.03   Enrollment, Reassignment, and            1200-13-13-.11   Appeal of Adverse Benefit Determinations
                 Disenrollment with Managed Care          1200-13-13-.12   Other Appeals by TennCare Applicants and
                 Contractors (MCCs)                                        Enrollees
1200-13-13-.04   Covered Services                         1200-13-13-.13   Member Abuse or Overutilization of the
1200-13-13-.05   Enrollee Cost Sharing                                     TennCare Pharmacy Program
1200-13-13-.06   Managed Care Organizations               1200-13-13-.14   Repealed
1200-13-13-.07   Managed Care Organization Payment        1200-13-13-.15   BESMART
1200-13-13-.08   Providers

1200-13-13-.01 DEFINITIONS.

       (1)   ABUSE shall mean enrollee practices, or enrollee involvement in practices, including
             overutilization, waste or fraudulent use/misuse of a TennCare Program that results in cost or
             utilization which is not medically necessary or medically justified. Abuse of a TennCare
             Pharmacy Program justifies placement on lock-in or prior approval status for all enrollees
             involved. Activities or practices which may evidence abuse of the TennCare Pharmacy
             Program include, but are not limited to, the following: forging or altering drug prescriptions,
             selling TennCare paid prescription drugs, failure to control pharmacy overutilization activity
             while on lock-in status and visiting multiple prescribers or pharmacies to obtain prescriptions
             that are not medically necessary.

       (2)   ACCESS TO HEALTH INSURANCE shall mean the opportunity an individual has to obtain
             group health insurance as defined elsewhere in these rules. If a person could have enrolled
             in work-related or other group health insurance during an employer’s or group’s open
             enrollment period and chose not to enroll (or had the choice made for him by a family
             member) that person shall not be considered to lack access to insurance upon closure of the
             open enrollment period. Neither the cost of an insurance policy or health plan nor the fact that
             an insurance policy is not as comprehensive as that of the TennCare Program shall be
             considered in determining eligibility to enroll in any TennCare category where being
             uninsured is an eligibility prerequisite.

       (3)   ADVERSE BENEFIT DETERMINATION shall mean, but is not limited to, a delay, denial,
             reduction, suspension or termination of TennCare benefits. See 42 C.F.R. § 438.400.

       (4)   APPLICATION PERIOD shall mean a specific time period determined by the Bureau of
             TennCare during which the Bureau will accept applications for the TennCare Standard Spend
             Down category as described in the Bureau’s rules at 1200-13-14-.02.

       (5)   BENEFITS shall mean the health care package of services developed by the Bureau of
             TennCare and which define the covered services available to TennCare enrollees. Additional
             benefits are available through the TennCare CHOICES program, as described in Rule 1200-
             13-01-.05, and the ECF CHOICES program, as described in Rule 1200-13-01-.31. CHOICES
             benefits are available only to persons who qualify for and are enrolled in the CHOICES
             program. ECF CHOICES benefits are available only to persons who qualify for and are
             enrolled in the ECF CHOICES program.




October, 2025 (Revised)                               1
TENNCARE MEDICAID                                                                   CHAPTER 1200-13-13

(Rule 1200-13-13-.01, continued)
      (6) BUPRENORPHINE ENHANCED SUPPORTIVE MEDICATION-ASSISTED RECOVERY
           AND TREATMENT (“BESMART”). A treatment model comprised of comprehensive treatment
           and recovery related supports for adult (21 and older) enrollees with opioid use disorder
           (OUD) (“participants”).

     (7)   BUREAU OF TENNCARE (BUREAU) shall mean the administrative unit of TennCare which
           is responsible for the administration of TennCare as defined elsewhere in these rules.

     (8)   CALL-IN LINE shall mean the toll-free telephone line used as the single point of entry during
           an open application period to accept new applications for the Standard Spend Down
           Program.

     (9)   CAPITATION PAYMENT shall mean the fee which is paid by the State to a managed care
           contractor operating under a risk-based contract for each enrollee covered by the plan for the
           provision of medical services, whether or not the enrollee utilizes services or without regard
           to the amount of services utilized during the payment period.

     (10) CAPITATION RATE shall mean the amount established by the State for the purpose of
          providing payment to participating managed care contractors operating under a risk-based
          contract.

     (11) CARETAKER RELATIVE shall mean that individual as defined at Tennessee Code
          Annotated § 71-3-103.

     (12) CATEGORICALLY NEEDY shall mean that category of TennCare Medicaid-eligibles as
          defined at 1240-03-02-.02 of the rules of the Tennessee Department of Human Services -
          Division of Medical Services.

     (13) CHOICES. See “TennCare CHOICES in Long-Term Care.”

     (14) CHOICES 217-Like Group. See definition in Rule 1200-13-01-.02.

     (15) CHOICES Group 1. See definition in Rule 1200-13-01-.02.

     (16) CHOICES Group 2. See definition in Rule 1200-13-01-.02.

     (17) CMS (CENTERS FOR MEDICARE AND MEDICAID SERVICES) (formerly known as HCFA)
          shall mean the agency within the United States Department of Health and Human Services
          that is responsible for administering Title XVIII, Title XIX, and Title XXI of the Social Security
          Act.

     (18) COBRA shall mean health insurance coverage provided pursuant to the Consolidated
          Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act.

     (19) CODE OF FEDERAL REGULATIONS (C.F.R.) shall mean Federal regulations promulgated
          to explain specific requirements of Federal law.

     (20) COMMENCEMENT OF SERVICES shall mean the time at which the first covered service(s)
          is/are rendered to a TennCare member for each individual medical condition.

     (21) COMMISSIONER shall mean the chief administrative officer of the Tennessee Department
          where the TennCare Bureau is administratively located, or the Commissioner’s designee.

     (22) COMPLETED APPLICATION is an application where:

           (a)   All required fields have been completed;



October, 2025 (Revised)                             2
TENNCARE MEDICAID                                                                  CHAPTER 1200-13-13

(Rule 1200-13-13-.01, continued)

           (b)   It is signed and dated by the applicant or the applicant’s parent or guardian;

           (c)   It includes all supporting documentation required by the TDHS or the Bureau to
                 determine TennCare eligibility, technical and financial requirements as set out in these
                 rules; and

           (d)   It includes all supporting documentation required to prove TennCare Standard medical
                 eligibility as set out in these rules.

     (23) CONTINUATION OR REINSTATEMENT OF BENEFITS (COB) shall mean the
          circumstances under which an enrollee may keep receiving, or, in the case of reinstatement,
          get back and keep receiving, the benefit under appeal until the appeal is resolved. See 42
          C.F.R. §§ 431.230, 431.231 and 438.420.

     (24) CONTINUOUS ENROLLMENT shall refer to the ability of certain individuals determined
          eligible for the TennCare Program to enroll at any time during the year. Continuous
          enrollment is limited to persons in the following two groups:

           (a)   TennCare Medicaid enrollees as defined in Rule 1200-13-13-.02.

           (b)   Individuals who are losing their Medicaid, who are uninsured, who are under nineteen
                 (19) years of age, and who meet the qualification for TennCare Standard as “Medicaid
                 Rollovers,” in accordance with the provisions of Rule 1200-13-14-.02.

     (25) CONTRACT PROVIDER shall have the same meaning as Participating Provider.

     (26) CONTRACTOR shall mean an organization approved by the Tennessee Department of
          Finance and Administration to provide TennCare-covered benefits to eligible enrollees in the
          TennCare Medicaid and TennCare Standard programs.

     (27) CONTRACTOR RISK AGREEMENT (CRA) shall mean the document delineating the terms
          of the agreement entered into by the Bureau of TennCare and the Managed Care
          Contractors.

     (28) CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE. A drug, substance, or immediate precursor identified by the
          U.S. Department of Justice, Drug Enforcement Administration or by the Tennessee Drug
          Control Act as having the potential for abuse and the likelihood of physical or psychological
          dependence if used incorrectly.

     (29) CORE MEDICAID POPULATION shall mean individuals eligible under Title XIX of the Social
          Security Act, 42 U.S.C. §§ 1396, et seq., with the exception of the following groups:
          individuals receiving SSI benefits as determined by the Social Security Administration;
          individuals eligible under a Refugee status; individuals eligible for emergency services as an
          illegal or undocumented alien; individuals receiving interim Medicaid benefits with a pending
          Medicaid disability determination; individuals with forty-five (45) days of presumptive or
          immediate eligibility; and children in DCS custody.

     (30) COST-EFFECTIVE ALTERNATIVE SERVICE shall mean a service that is not a covered
          service but that is approved by TennCare and CMS and provided at an MCC’s discretion.
          TennCare enrollees are not entitled to receive these services. Cost-effective alternative
          services may be provided because they are either (1) alternatives to covered Medicaid
          services that, in the MCC’s judgment, are cost-effective or (2) preventative in nature and
          offered to avoid the development of conditions that, in the MCC’s judgment, would require
          more costly treatment in the future. Cost-effective alternative services need not be
          determined medically necessary except to the extent that they are provided as an alternative



October, 2025 (Revised)                             3
TENNCARE MEDICAID                                                                     CHAPTER 1200-13-13

(Rule 1200-13-13-.01, continued)
           to covered Medicaid services. Even if medically necessary, cost effective alternative services
           are not covered services and are provided only at an MCC’s discretion.

      (31) COST SHARING shall mean the amounts that certain enrollees in TennCare are required to
           pay for their TennCare coverage and covered services. Cost sharing includes copayments.

      (32) COVERED SERVICES shall mean the services and benefits that:

            (a)   TennCare contracted MCCs cover, as set out elsewhere in this Chapter and in Rule
                  1200-13-01-.05; or

            (b)   In the instance of enrollees who are eligible for and enrolled in federal Medicaid
                  waivers under Section 1915(c) of the Social Security Act, the services and benefits that
                  are covered under the terms and conditions of such waivers.

      (33) CPT4 CODES are descriptive terms contained in the Physician’s Current Procedural
           Terminology, used to identify medical services and procedures performed by physicians or
           other licensed health professionals.

      (34) DBM (DENTAL BENEFITS MANAGER) shall mean a contractor approved by the Tennessee
           Department of Finance and Administration to provide dental benefits to enrollees in the
           TennCare Program to the extent such services are covered by TennCare.

      (35) DELAY shall mean failure to provide timely receipt of TennCare services, and no specific
           waiting period may be required before the enrollee can appeal.

      (36) DEMAND LETTER shall mean a letter sent by TennCare to a TennCare Standard enrollee
           with premium obligations notifying the enrollee that he is at least sixty (60) days delinquent in
           his premium payments.

      (37) DISCONTINUED DEMONSTRATION GROUP shall mean the group of non-Medicaid eligible
           individuals who were enrolled in TennCare Standard on April 29, 2005, when the categories
           in which they were enrolled were terminated, and who have not yet been enrolled in
           TennCare Medicaid or disenrolled from the TennCare program.

      (38) DISENROLLMENT shall mean the discontinuance of an individual’s enrollment in TennCare.

      (39) DURABLE MEDICAL EQUIPMENT (DME) shall mean equipment that can withstand
           repeated use, can be removable, is primarily and customarily used to serve a medical
           purpose, generally is not useful to a person in the absence of an illness or injury, is suitable
           for use in any non-institutional setting in which everyday life activities take place, and is
           related to the patient’s physical disorder. Non-institutional settings do not include a hospital or
           nursing facility (NF). Routine DME items, including but not limited to wheelchairs (except as
           defined below), walkers, hospital beds, canes, commodes, traction equipment, suction
           machines, patient lifts, weight scales, and other items provided to a member receiving
           services in a NF that are within the scope of per diem reimbursement for NF services shall
           not be covered or reimbursable under the Medicaid program separate and apart from
           payment for the NF service. Customized wheelchairs, wheelchair seating systems, and other
           items that are beyond the scope of Medicaid reimbursement for NF services shall be covered
           by the member’s managed care organization, so long as such items:

            (a)   Are medically necessary for the continuous care of a member; and

            (b)   Must be custom-made or modified or may be commercially available, but must be
                  individually measured and selected to address the member’s unique and permanent
                  medical need for positioning, support or mobility; and



October, 2025 (Revised)                               4
TENNCARE MEDICAID                                                                  CHAPTER 1200-13-13

(Rule 1200-13-13-.01, continued)

           (c)   Are solely for the use of that member and not for other NF residents.

     (40) EARLY AND PERIODIC SCREENING, DIAGNOSIS, AND TREATMENT (EPSDT)
          SERVICES, a covered benefit for TennCare Medicaid-enrolled children only, shall mean:

           (a)   Screening in accordance with professional standards, and interperiodic, diagnostic
                 services to determine the existence of physical or mental illnesses or conditions of
                 TennCare Medicaid enrollees under age twenty-one (21); and

           (b)   Health care, treatment, and other measures, described in 42 U.S.C. § 1396a(a) to
                 correct or ameliorate any defects and physical and mental illnesses and conditions
                 discovered.

     (41) ELIGIBLE shall mean a person who has been determined to meet the eligibility criteria of
          TennCare Medicaid or TennCare Standard.

     (42) EMPLOYMENT AND COMMUNITY FIRST (ECF) CHOICES shall mean the program defined
          in Rule 1200-13-01-.02 and described in Rule 1200-13-01-.31.

     (43) ENROLLEE shall mean an individual eligible for and enrolled in the TennCare program or in
          any Tennessee federal Medicaid waiver program approved by the Secretary of the U.S.
          Department of Health and Human Services pursuant to Sections 1115 or 1915 of the Social
          Security Act. As concerns MCC compliance with these rules, the term only applies to those
          individuals for whom the MCC has received at least one day’s prior written or electronic
          notice from the TennCare Bureau of the individual’s assignment to the MCC.

     (44) ENROLLMENT shall mean the process by which a TennCare-eligible person becomes
          enrolled in TennCare.

     (45) ESCORT shall mean an individual who accompanies an enrollee to receive a medically
          necessary service. For the purpose of determining whether an individual may qualify as an
          escort who may be transported without cost to the enrollee as a covered TennCare benefit,
          the following criteria apply:

           (a)    Any person over the age of twelve (12) selected by the enrollee;

           (b)   Any person under the age of twelve (12) is presumed to be too young to serve as an
                 escort. At the time of request for transportation, this presumption can be overcome by
                 specific facts provided by the enrollee, which would demonstrate to a reasonable
                 person that the proposed escort could in fact be of assistance to the enrollee; and

           (c)   Any person under the age of six (6) is excluded in all cases from the role of escort.

     (46) FAMILY shall mean that as defined in the rules of the Tennessee Department of Human
          Services found at 1240-01-03 and 1240-01-04, Family Assistance Division, and 1240-03-03,
          Division of Medical Services.

     (47) FEDERAL FINANCIAL PARTICIPATION (FFP) shall mean the Federal Government’s share
          of a state’s expenditure under the Title XIX Medicaid Program.

     (48) FINAL AGENCY ACTION shall mean the resolution of an appeal by the TennCare Bureau or
          an initial decision on the merits of an appeal by an administrative judge or hearing officer
          when such initial decision is not modified or overturned by the TennCare Bureau. Final
          agency action shall be treated as binding for purposes of these rules.




October, 2025 (Revised)                             5
TENNCARE MEDICAID                                                                CHAPTER 1200-13-13

(Rule 1200-13-13-.01, continued)
      (49) FRAUD shall mean an intentional deception or misrepresentation made by a person who
           knows or should have known that the deception could result in some unauthorized benefit to
           himself or some other person. It includes any act that constitutes fraud under applicable
           federal or state law.

     (50) GRAND DIVISIONS shall mean the three (3) distinct geographic areas of the State of
          Tennessee, known as Eastern, Middle, and Western, as designated in Tennessee Code
          Annotated § 4-1-201.

     (51) GROUP HEALTH INSURANCE shall mean an employee welfare benefit plan to the extent
          that the plan provides medical care to employees or their dependents (as defined under the
          terms of the plan) directly through insurance reimbursement mechanism. This definition
          includes those types of health insurance found in the Health Insurance Portability And
          Accountability Act of 1996, as amended, definition of creditable coverage (with the exception
          that the 50 or more participants criteria does not apply), which includes Medicare and
          TRICARE. Health insurance benefits obtained through COBRA are included in this definition.
          It also covers group health insurance available to an individual through membership in a
          professional organization or a school.

     (52) HANDICAPPING MALOCCLUSION shall mean a malocclusion which causes one of the
          following medical conditions:

           (a)   A nutritional deficiency that has proven non-responsive to medical treatment without
                 orthodontic treatment. The nutritional deficiency must have been diagnosed by a
                 qualified treating physician and must have been documented in the qualified treating
                 physician’s progress notes. The progress notes that document the nutritional deficiency
                 must predate the treating orthodontist’s prior authorization request for orthodontics.

           (b)   A speech pathology that has proven non-responsive to speech therapy without
                 orthodontic treatment. The speech pathology must have been diagnosed by a qualified
                 speech therapist and must have been documented in the qualified speech therapist’s
                 progress notes. The progress notes that document the speech pathology must predate
                 the treating orthodontist’s prior authorization request for orthodontics.

           (c)   Laceration of soft tissue caused by a deep impinging overbite. Occasional cheek biting
                 does not constitute laceration of soft tissue. Laceration of the soft tissue must be
                 documented in the treating orthodontist’s progress notes and must predate the treating
                 orthodontist’s prior authorization request for orthodontics.

           Anecdotal information is insufficient to document the presence of a handicapping
           malocclusion. The presence of a handicapping malocclusion must be supported by the
           treating professional’s progress notes and patient record.

     (53) HEALTH INSURANCE, for the purposes of determining eligibility under these regulations:

           (a)   Shall mean:

                 1.    Any hospital and medical expense-incurred policy;

                 2.    Medicare;

                 3.    TRICARE;

                 4.    COBRA;

                 5.    Medicaid;



October, 2025 (Revised)                           6
TENNCARE MEDICAID                                                                    CHAPTER 1200-13-13

(Rule 1200-13-13-.01, continued)

                 6.    State health risk pool;

                 7.    Nonprofit health care service plan contract;

                 8.    Health maintenance organization subscriber contracts;

                 9.    An employee welfare benefit plan to the extent that the plan provides medical
                       care to an employee or his/her dependents (as defined under the terms of the
                       plan) directly through insurance, any form of self insurance, or a reimbursement
                       mechanism;

                 10.   Coverage available to an individual through membership in a professional
                       organization or a school;

                 11.   Coverage under a policy covering one person or all the members of a family
                       under a single policy where the contract exists solely between the individual and
                       the insurance company;

                 12.   Any of the above types of policies where:

                       (i)     The policy contains a type of benefit (such as mental health benefits) which
                               has been completely exhausted;

                       (ii)    The policy contains a type of benefit (such as pharmacy) for which an
                               annual limitation has been reached;

                       (iii)   The policy has a specific exclusion or rider of non-coverage based on a
                               specific prior existing condition or an existing condition or treatment of such
                               a condition; or

                 13.   Any of the types of policies listed above will be considered health insurance even
                       if one or more of the following circumstances exists:

                       (i)     The policy contains fewer benefits than TennCare;

                       (ii)    The policy costs more than TennCare; or

                       (iii)   The policy is one the individual could have bought during a specified period
                               of time (such as COBRA) but chose not to do so.

           (b)   Shall not mean:

                 1.    Short-term coverage;

                 2.    Accident coverage;

                 3.    Fixed indemnity insurance;

                 4.    Long-term care insurance;

                 5.    Disability income contracts;

                 6.    Limited benefits policies as defined elsewhere in these rules;

                 7.    Credit insurance;



October, 2025 (Revised)                               7
TENNCARE MEDICAID                                                                   CHAPTER 1200-13-13

(Rule 1200-13-13-.01, continued)

                 8.    School-sponsored sports-related injury coverage;

                 9.    Coverage issued as a supplemental to liability insurance;

                 10.   Automobile medical payment insurance;

                 11.   Insurance under which benefits are payable with or without regard to fault and
                       which are statutorily required to be contained in any liability insurance policy or
                       equivalent self-insurance;

                 12.   A medical care program of the Indian Health Services (IHS) or a tribal
                       organization;

                 13.   Benefits received through the Veteran’s Administration; or

                 14.   Health care provided through a government clinic or program such as, but not
                       limited to, vaccinations, flu shots, mammograms, and care or services received
                       through a disease- or condition-specific program such as, but not limited to, the
                       Ryan White Care Act.

     (54) HEALTH MAINTENANCE ORGANIZATION (HMO) shall mean an entity licensed by the
          Tennessee Department of Commerce and Insurance under applicable provisions of
          Tennessee Code Annotated (T.C.A.) Title 56, Chapter 32 to provide health care services.

     (55) HEALTH PLAN shall mean a Managed Care Organization authorized by the Tennessee
          Department of Finance and Administration to provide medical and behavioral services to
          enrollees in the TennCare Program.

     (56) HEARING OFFICER shall mean an administrative judge or hearing officer who is not an
          employee, agent or representative of the MCC or who did not participate in, nor was
          consulted about, any TennCare Bureau review prior to the State Fair Hearing (SFH).

     (57) HIPAA shall mean the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996, as
          amended.

     (58) HOME HEALTH SERVICES shall mean:

           (a)   Any of the services identified in 42 C.F.R. § 440.70 and delivered in accordance with
                 the provisions of 42 C.F.R. § 440.70. “Part-time or intermittent nursing services” and
                 “home health aide services” are covered only as defined specifically in these rules.

                 1.    Part-time or intermittent nursing services.

                       (i)   To be considered “part-time or intermittent,” nursing services must be
                             provided as no more than one visit per day, with each visit lasting less than
                             eight (8) hours, and no more than 27 total hours of nursing care may be
                             provided per week. In addition, nursing services and home health aide
                             services combined must total less than or equal to eight (8) hours per day
                             and 35 or fewer hours per week. On a case-by-case basis, the weekly total
                             for nursing services may be increased to 30 hours and the weekly total for
                             nursing services and home health aide services combined may be
                             increased to 40 hours for patients qualifying for Level 2 skilled nursing
                             care.




October, 2025 (Revised)                             8
TENNCARE MEDICAID                                                                     CHAPTER 1200-13-13

(Rule 1200-13-13-.01, continued)
                       (ii)  Part-time or intermittent nursing services are not covered if the only skilled
                             nursing function needed is administration of medications on a p.r.n. (as
                             needed) basis. Nursing services may include medication administration;
                             however, a nursing visit will not be extended in order to administer
                             medication or perform other skilled nursing functions at more than one
                             point during the day, unless skilled nursing services are medically
                             necessary throughout the intervening period. If there is more than one
                             person in a household who is determined to require TennCare-reimbursed
                             home health nursing services, it is not necessary to have multiple nurses
                             providing the services. A single nurse may provide services to multiple
                             enrollees in the same home and during the same hours, as long as he can
                             provide these services safely and appropriately to each enrollee.

                        (iii)   The above limits may be exceeded when medically necessary for children
                                under the age of 21.

                  2.    Home health aide services.

                        (i)     Home health aide services must be provided as no more than two visits
                                per day with care provided less than or equal to eight (8) hours per day.
                                Nursing services and home health aide services combined must total less
                                than or equal to eight (8) hours per day and 35 or fewer hours per week.
                                On a case-by-case basis, the weekly total may be increased to 40 hours
                                for patients qualifying for Level 2 skilled nursing care. If there is more than
                                one person in a household who is determined to require TennCare-
                                reimbursed home health aide services, it is not necessary to have multiple
                                home health aides providing the services. A single home health aide may
                                provide services to multiple enrollees in the same home and during the
                                same hours, as long as he can provide these services safely and
                                appropriately to each enrollee.

                        (ii)    The above limits may be exceeded when medically necessary for children
                                under the age of 21.

            (b)   Home health providers shall only provide services to the recipient that have been
                  ordered by the treating physician and are pursuant to a plan of care and shall not
                  provide other services such as general child care services, cleaning services,
                  preparation of meals, or services to other household members. Because children
                  typically have non-medical care needs which must be met, to the extent that home
                  health services are provided to a person under 18 years of age, a responsible adult
                  (other than the home health care provider) must be present at all times in the home
                  during the provision of home health services unless all of the following criteria are met:

                  1.    The child is non-ambulatory; and

                  2.    The child has no or extremely limited ability to interact with caregivers; and

                  3.    The child shall not reasonably be expected to have needs that fall outside the
                        scope of medically necessary TennCare covered benefits (e.g. the child has no
                        need for general supervision or meal preparation) during the time the home
                        health provider is present in the home without the presence of another
                        responsible adult; and

                  4.    No other children requiring adult care or supervision shall be present in the home
                        during the time the home health provider is present in the home without the




October, 2025 (Revised)                               9
TENNCARE MEDICAID                                                                   CHAPTER 1200-13-13

(Rule 1200-13-13-.01, continued)
                        presence of another responsible adult, unless these children meet all the criteria
                        stated above and are also receiving TennCare-reimbursed home health services.

      (59) INCOME shall mean that definition of income in Rule 1240-01-04 of the Tennessee
           Department of Human Services - Family Assistance Division.

      (60) INDIVIDUAL HEALTH INSURANCE shall mean health insurance coverage under a policy
           covering one person or all the members of a family under a single policy where the contract
           exists solely between that person and the insurance company.

      (61) INFANT DIAPER shall mean a disposable product with absorbent material that is designed
           by the manufacturer to be fastened around a child’s waist and between the child’s legs to
           absorb and retain urine or feces. Infant Diapers do not include cloth or non-disposable
           diapers or diapering supplies (such as wipes or diaper cream). Coverage for Infant Diapers is
           outlined in Rule .04.

      (62) INITIATING PROVIDER shall mean the provider who renders the first covered service to a
           TennCare member whose current medical condition requires the services of more than one
           (1) provider.

      (63) INMATE shall mean an individual confined in a local, state, or federal prison, jail, youth
           development center, or other penal or correctional facility, including a furlough from such
           facility.

      (64) IN-NETWORK PROVIDER shall have the same meaning as Participating Provider.

      (65) INPATIENT REHABILITATION FACILITIES shall mean rehabilitation hospitals and distinct
           parts of hospitals that are designated as ‘IRFs’ by Medicare.

      (66) INSTITUTION FOR MENTAL DISEASES (IMD) shall mean a hospital, nursing facility, or
           other institution of more than 16 beds that is primarily engaged in providing diagnosis,
           treatment, or care of persons with mental diseases, including medical attention, nursing care,
           and related services.

      (67) LICENSED MENTAL HEALTH PROFESSIONAL shall mean a Board eligible or a Board
           certified psychiatrist or a person with at least a Master’s degree and/or clinical training in an
           accepted mental health field which includes, but is not limited to, counseling, nursing,
           occupational therapy, psychology, social work, vocational rehabilitation, or activity therapy
           with a current valid license by the Tennessee Licensing Board for the Healing Arts.

      (68) LIMITED BENEFITS POLICY shall mean a policy of health coverage for a specific disease
           (e.g., cancer), or an accident occurring while engaged in a specified activity (e.g., school-
           based sports), or which provides for a cash benefit payable directly to the insured in the
           event of an accident or hospitalization (e.g., hospital indemnity).

      (69) LOCK-IN PROVIDER. A provider, pharmacy or physician, chosen by an enrollee on
           pharmacy lock-in status to whom the enrollee is assigned by TennCare for the purpose of
           receiving covered pharmacy services.

      (70) LOCK-IN STATUS. The restriction of an enrollee to a specified physician, or to a specified
           pharmacy provider at a specified single location.

      (71) LONG-TERM CARE shall mean programs and services described under Rule 1200-13-01-
           .01.

      (72) MCC (MANAGED CARE CONTRACTOR) shall mean:



October, 2025 (Revised)                             10
TENNCARE MEDICAID                                                                  CHAPTER 1200-13-13

(Rule 1200-13-13-.01, continued)

           (a)   A Managed Care Organization, Pharmacy Benefits Manager and/or a Dental Benefits
                 Manager which has signed a TennCare Contractor Risk Agreement with the State and
                 operates a provider network and provides covered health services to TennCare
                 enrollees; or

           (b)   A Pharmacy Benefits Manager, Behavioral Health Organization or Dental Benefits
                 Manager which subcontracts with a Managed Care Organization to provide services; or

           (c)   A State government agency that contracts with TennCare for the provision of services.

     (73) MCO (Managed Care Organization) shall mean an appropriately licensed Health
          Maintenance Organization (HMO) approved by the Bureau of TennCare as capable of
          providing medical, behavioral, and long-term care services in the TennCare Program.

     (74) MEDICAID shall mean the federal- and state-financed, state-run program of medical
          assistance pursuant to Title XIX of the Social Security Act. Medicaid eligibility in Tennessee
          is determined by the Tennessee Department of Human Services, under contract to the
          Tennessee Department of Finance and Administration. Tennessee residents determined
          eligible for SSI benefits by the Social Security Administration are also enrolled in
          Tennessee’s TennCare Medicaid program.

     (75) MEDICAID “ROLLOVER” ENROLLEE shall mean a TennCare Medicaid enrollee who no
          longer meets technical eligibility requirements for Medicaid and will be afforded an
          opportunity to enroll in TennCare Standard in accordance with the provisions of these rules.

     (76) MEDICAL ASSISTANCE shall mean health care, services and supplies furnished to an
          enrollee and funded in whole or in part under Title XIX of the Social Security Act, 42 U.S.C.
          §§ 1396, et seq. and Tennessee Code Annotated §§ 71-5-101, et seq. Medical assistance
          includes the payment of the cost of care, services, drugs and supplies. Such care, services,
          drugs, and supplies shall include services of qualified providers who have contracted with an
          MCC or are otherwise authorized to provide services to TennCare enrollees (i.e., emergency
          services provided out-of-network or medically necessary services obtained out-of-network
          because of an MCC’s failure to provide adequate access to services in-network).

     (77) MEDICAL RECORD shall mean all medical histories; records, reports and summaries;
          diagnoses; prognoses; records of treatment and medication ordered and given; x-ray and
          radiology interpretations; physical therapy charts and notes; lab reports; other individualized
          medical documentation in written or electronic format; and analyses of such information.

     (78) MEDICAL SUPPLIES shall mean covered medical supplies that are deemed medically
          necessary and appropriate and are prescribed for use in the diagnosis and treatment of
          medical conditions. Medically necessary medical supplies not included as part of institutional
          services shall be covered only when provided by or through a licensed home health agency,
          by or through a licensed medical vendor supplier or by or through a licensed pharmacist.

     (79) MEDICALLY ELIGIBLE shall mean a person who has met the medical eligibility criteria for
          the TennCare Standard program through a mechanism permitted under the provisions of
          these rules.

     (80) MEDICALLY NECESSARY is defined by Tennessee Code Annotated, Section 71-5-144, and
          shall describe a medical item or service that meets the criteria set forth in that statute. The
          term “medically necessary,” as defined by Tennessee Code Annotated, Section 71-5-144,
          applies to TennCare enrollees. Implementation of the term “medically necessary” is provided
          for in these rules, consistent with the statutory provisions, which control in case of ambiguity.
          No enrollee shall be entitled to receive and TennCare shall not be required to pay for any



October, 2025 (Revised)                            11
TENNCARE MEDICAID                                                                      CHAPTER 1200-13-13

(Rule 1200-13-13-.01, continued)
           items or services that fail fully to satisfy all criteria of “medically necessary” items or services,
           as defined either in the statute or in the Medical Necessity rule chapter at 1200-13-16.

      (81) MEDICALLY NEEDY shall mean that category of TennCare Medicaid-eligibles as defined in
           Rule 1240-03-02-.03 of the Tennessee Department of Human Services - Division of Medical
           Services.

      (82) MEDICARE shall mean the program administered through the Social Security Administration
           pursuant to Title XVIII, available to most individuals upon attaining age sixty-five (65), to
           some disabled individuals under age sixty-five (65), and to individuals having End Stage
           Renal Disease (ESRD).

      (83) MEMBER shall mean a TennCare Medicaid- or TennCare Standard-eligible individual who is
           enrolled in a managed care organization.

      (84) NON-CONTRACT PROVIDER shall have the same meaning as Non-Participating Provider.

      (85) NON-PARTICIPATING PROVIDER shall mean a TennCare provider, as defined in this Rule,
           who is not contracted with a particular enrollee’s MCO. This term may include TennCare
           providers who furnish services outside the managed care program on a fee-for-service basis,
           as well as TennCare providers who receive Medicare crossover payments from TennCare.

      (86) NON-TENNCARE PROVIDER shall mean a provider who is not enrolled in TennCare and
           who accepts no TennCare reimbursement for any service, including Medicare crossover
           payments.

      (87) OPEN ENROLLMENT shall mean a designated period of time, determined by the Bureau of
           TennCare, during which persons who are not currently TennCare eligible may apply for the
           Standard Spend Down program.

      (88) OPEN MEDICAID CATEGORIES shall mean those Medicaid eligibility categories for which
           enrollment has not been closed pursuant to authority granted by CMS as part of the
           TennCare demonstration project.

      (89) OUT-OF-NETWORK PROVIDER shall have the same meaning as Non-Participating
           Provider.

      (90) OUT-OF-STATE EMERGENCY PROVIDER shall mean a provider outside the State of
           Tennessee who does not participate in TennCare in any way except to bill for emergency
           services, as defined in this Chapter, provided out-of-state to a particular MCC’s enrollee. An
           Out-of-State Emergency Provider must abide by all TennCare rules and regulations,
           including those concerning provider billing of enrollees as found in Rule 1200-13-13-.08. In
           order to receive payment from TennCare, Out-of-State Emergency Providers must be
           appropriately licensed in the state in which the emergency services were delivered, they must
           enroll with TennCare and they must not be excluded from participation in Medicare or
           Medicaid.

      (91) OVERUTILIZATION shall mean any of the following:

            (a)    The enrollee initiated use of TennCare services or supplies at a frequency or amount
                   that is not medically necessary or medically justified.

            (b)    Overutilization, or attempted overutilization, of the TennCare Pharmacy Program which
                   justifies placement on lock-in status for all enrollees involved.




October, 2025 (Revised)                               12
TENNCARE MEDICAID                                                                 CHAPTER 1200-13-13

(Rule 1200-13-13-.01, continued)
           (c)   Activities or practices which may evidence overutilization of the TennCare Pharmacy
                 Program including, but not limited to, the following:

                 1.    Treatment by several physicians for the same diagnosis;

                 2.    Obtaining the same or similar controlled substances from several physicians;

                 3.    Obtaining controlled substances in excess of the maximum recommended dose;

                 4.    Receiving combinations of drugs which act synergistically or belong to the same
                       class;

                 5.    Frequent treatment for diagnoses which are highly susceptible to abuse;

                 6.    Receiving services and/or drugs from numerous providers;

                 7.    Obtaining the same or similar drugs on the same day or at frequent intervals; or

                 8.    Frequent use of the emergency room in non-emergency situations in order to
                       obtain prescription drugs.

     (92) PARTICIPATING PROVIDER shall mean a TennCare provider, as defined in this Rule, who
          has entered into a contract with an enrollee’s Managed Care Contractor.

     (93) PBM (PHARMACY BENEFITS MANAGER) shall mean an organization approved by the
          Tennessee Department of Finance and Administration to administer pharmacy benefits to
          enrollees to the extent such services are covered by the TennCare Program. A PBM may
          have a signed TennCare Contractor Risk Agreement with the State, or may be a
          subcontractor to an MCO.

     (94) PERSONAL CARE SERVICES shall refer to an optional Medicaid benefit defined at 42
          C.F.R. § 440.167 that, per the Tennessee Medicaid State Plan, Tennessee has not elected to
          include in the TennCare benefit package. To the extent that such services are available to
          children under the age of 21 when medically necessary under the provisions of EPSDT, the
          Bureau of TennCare designates home health aides as the providers qualified to deliver such
          services. When medically necessary, personal care services may be authorized outside of
          the home setting when normal life activities temporarily take the recipient outside of that
          setting. Normal life activity for a child under the age of 21 means routine work (including work
          in supported or sheltered work settings); licensed child care; school and school-related
          activities; religious services and related activities; and outpatient health care services
          (including services delivered through a TennCare home and community based services
          waiver program). The home health aide providing personal care services may accompany the
          recipient but may not drive. Normal life activities do not include non-routine or extended
          home absences.

     (95) PHARMACY LOCK-IN PROGRAM shall mean the program designed to reduce enrollee
          pharmacy benefit Abuse or Overutilization, as set forth in 1200-13-13-.13.

     (96) PHYSICIAN shall mean a person licensed pursuant to chapter 6 or 9 of title 63 of the
          Tennessee Code Annotated.

     (97) POVERTY LEVEL shall mean the poverty level established by the Federal Government.

     (98) POWER SEATING ACCESSORIES. Accessories available to modify a power wheelchair
          base are covered by TennCare when all listed criteria are met as follows:




October, 2025 (Revised)                            13
TENNCARE MEDICAID                                                                    CHAPTER 1200-13-13

(Rule 1200-13-13-.01, continued)
           (a)   Power Seat Elevation System.

                 1.    It is ordered by the Enrollee’s treating physician.

                 2.    An assessment conducted by a licensed physical therapist or licensed
                       occupational therapist establishes that:

                       (i)     The Enrollee has the cognitive ability and enough upper extremity function
                               to carry out mobility-related activities of daily living such as feeding,
                               grooming, dressing, and transferring; and

                       (ii)    The activities for which the accessory will be used are conducted primarily
                               in the enrollee’s home.

           (b)   Power Standing System.

                 1.    It is ordered by the Enrollee’s treating physician.

                 2.    An assessment conducted by a licensed physical therapist or licensed
                       occupational therapist establishes that the Enrollee:

                       (i)     Has a chronic condition that causes him to have limited or no ability to
                               stand; and

                       (ii)    Has a physical condition that allows him to stand, when supported, for
                               meaningful periods of time, i.e., he will not suffer loss of blood pressure or
                               have problems with bowel or urine retention; and

                       (iii)   Has the cognitive ability and enough upper extremity function to carry out
                               mobility-related activities of daily living such as feeding, grooming,
                               dressing, and transferring; and

                       (iv)    Meets at least one other complex rehabilitation criterion for a power seat
                               accessory such as a tilt seat and also qualifies for a Group 3 base Power
                               Wheelchair.

     (99) POWER WHEELCHAIR ACCESSORIES. All powered wheelchair accessories not defined in
          this rule as Power Seating Accessories are excluded from TennCare coverage but may be
          provided by an MCO as a cost effective alternative service as defined in this rule.

     (100) PRESCRIBER. An individual authorized by law to prescribe drugs.

     (101) PRIMARY CARE PHYSICIAN shall mean a physician responsible for supervising,
           coordinating, and providing initial and primary care to patients; for initiating referrals for
           specialist care; and for maintaining the continuity of patient care. A primary care physician is
           a physician who has limited his practice of medicine to general practice or who is a Board
           Certified or Eligible Internist, Pediatrician, Obstetrician/Gynecologist, or Family Practitioner.

     (102) PRIMARY CARE PROVIDER shall mean health care professional capable of providing a
           wide variety of basic health services. Primary care providers include practitioners of family,
           general, or internal medicine; pediatricians and obstetricians; nurse practitioners; midwives;
           and physician’s assistant in general or family practice.

     (103) PRIOR APPROVAL STATUS shall mean the restriction of an enrollee to a procedure wherein
           services, except in emergency situations, must be approved by the TennCare Bureau or the
           MCC prior to the delivery of services.



October, 2025 (Revised)                             14
TENNCARE MEDICAID                                                                    CHAPTER 1200-13-13

(Rule 1200-13-13-.01, continued)

     (104) PRIOR AUTHORIZATION shall mean the process under which services, except in
           emergency situations, must be approved by the TennCare Bureau or the MCC prior to the
           delivery in order for such services to be covered by the TennCare program.

     (105) PRIOR AUTHORIZATION STATUS (PA STATUS) shall mean the status wherein an enrollee
           has triggered an event described in Rule .13 of this Chapter and as a result must acquire a
           prior authorization for every prescription fill of any controlled substance, with the exclusion of
           medications intended for the treatment of opioid use disorder (i.e., buprenorphine or
           buprenorphine/naloxone).

     (106) PRIVATE DUTY NURSING SERVICES shall mean nursing services for recipients who
           require eight (8) or more hours of continuous skilled nursing care during a 24-hour period.

           (a)   A person who needs intermittent skilled nursing functions at specified intervals, but who
                 does not require continuous skilled nursing care throughout the period between each
                 interval, shall not be determined to need continuous skilled nursing care. Skilled
                 nursing care is provided by a registered nurse or licensed practical nurse under the
                 direction of the recipient’s physician to the recipient and not to other household
                 members. If there is more than one person in a household who is determined to require
                 TennCare-reimbursed private duty nursing services, it is not necessary to have multiple
                 nurses providing the services. A single nurse may provide services to multiple
                 enrollees in the same home and during the same hours, as long as he can provide
                 these services safely and appropriately to each enrollee.

           (b)   If it is determined by the MCO to be cost-effective, non-skilled services may be
                 provided by a nurse rather than a home health aide. However, it is the total number of
                 hours of skilled nursing services, not the number of hours that the nurse is in the home,
                 that determines whether the nursing services are continuous or intermittent.

           (c)   Private duty nursing services are covered for adults aged 21 and older only when
                 medically necessary to support the use of ventilator equipment or other life-sustaining
                 medical technology when constant nursing supervision, visual assessment, and
                 monitoring of both equipment and patient are required. For purposes of this rule, an
                 adult is considered to be using ventilator equipment or other life-sustaining medical
                 technology if he:

                 1.     Is ventilator dependent for at least 12 hours each day with an invasive patient
                        end of the circuit (i.e., tracheostomy cannula); or

                 2.     Is ventilator dependent with a progressive neuromuscular disorder or spinal cord
                        injury, and is ventilated using noninvasive positive pressure ventilation (NIPPV)
                        by mask or mouthpiece for at least 12 hours each day in order to avoid or delay
                        tracheostomy (requires medical review); or

                 3.     Has a functioning tracheostomy:

                        (i)     Requiring suctioning; and

                        (ii)    Oxygen supplementation; and

                        (iii)   Receiving nebulizer treatments or requiring the use of Cough Assist/in-
                                exsufflator devices; and

                        (iv)    In addition, at least one subitem from each of the following items (I and II)
                                must be met:



October, 2025 (Revised)                              15
TENNCARE MEDICAID                                                                   CHAPTER 1200-13-13

(Rule 1200-13-13-.01, continued)

                             (I)    Medication:

                                    I.    Receiving medication via a gastrostomy tube (G-tube); or

                                    II.   Receiving medication via a Peripherally Inserted Central
                                          Catheter (PICC) line or central port; and

                             (II)   Nutrition:

                                    I.    Receiving bolus or continuous feedings via a permanent
                                          access    such   as    a   G-tube,    Mickey Button, or
                                          Gastrojejunostomy tube (G-J tube); or

                                    II.   Receiving total parenteral nutrition.

           (d)   Private duty nursing services are covered as medically necessary for children under
                 the age of 21 in accordance with EPSDT requirements. As a general rule, only a child
                 who is dependent upon technology-based medical equipment requiring constant
                 nursing supervision, visual assessment, and monitoring of both equipment and child
                 will be determined to need private duty nursing services. However, determinations of
                 medical necessity will continue to be made on an individualized basis.

           (e)   A child who needs less than eight (8) hours of continuous skilled nursing care during a
                 24-hour period or an adult who needs nursing care but does not qualify for private duty
                 nursing care per the requirements of these rules may receive medically necessary
                 nursing care as an intermittent service under home health.

           (f)   General childcare services and other non-hands-on assistance such as cleaning and
                 meal preparation shall not be provided by a private duty nurse. Because children
                 typically have non-medical care needs which must be met, to the extent that private
                 duty nursing services are provided to a person or persons under 18 years of age, a
                 responsible adult (other than the private duty nurse) must be present at all times in the
                 home during the provision of private duty nursing services unless all of the following
                 criteria are met:

                 1.    The child is non-ambulatory; and

                 2.    The child has no or extremely limited ability to interact with caregivers; and

                 3.    The child shall not reasonably be expected to have needs that fall outside the
                       scope of medically necessary TennCare covered benefits (e.g., the child has no
                       need for general supervision or meal preparation) during the time the private duty
                       nurse is present in the home without the presence of another responsible adult;
                       and

                 4.    No other children shall be present in the home during the time the private duty
                       nurse is present in the home without the presence of another responsible adult,
                       unless these children meet all of the criteria stated above and are also receiving
                       TennCare-reimbursed private duty nursing services.

     (107) PROVIDER shall mean an appropriately licensed institution, facility, agency, person,
           corporation, partnership, or association that delivers health care services. Providers are
           categorized as either TennCare Providers or Non-TennCare Providers. TennCare Providers
           may be further categorized as being one of the following:




October, 2025 (Revised)                            16
TENNCARE MEDICAID                                                                   CHAPTER 1200-13-13

(Rule 1200-13-13-.01, continued)
           (a)   Participating Providers or In-Network Providers

           (b)    Non-Participating Providers or Out-of-Network Providers

           (c)    Out-of-State Emergency Providers

            Definitions of each of these terms are contained in this Rule.

      (108) PROVIDER-INITIATED REDUCTION, TERMINATION OR SUSPENSION OF SERVICES
            shall mean a decision to reduce, terminate, or suspend an enrollee’s TennCare services
            which is initiated by the enrollee’s provider, rather than by the MCC.

      (109) PROVIDER WITH PRESCRIBING AUTHORITY shall mean, in the context of TennCare
            pharmacy services, a health care professional authorized by law or regulation to order
            prescription medications for his/her patients, and who:

           (a)    Participates in the provider network of the MCC in which the enrollee is enrolled; or

           (b)    Has received a referral of the enrollee, approved by the MCC, authorizing her to treat
                  the enrollee; or

           (c)    In the case of a TennCare enrollee who is also enrolled in Medicare, is authorized to
                  treat Medicare patients.

      (110) PRUDENT LAY PERSON shall mean a reasonable person who possesses an average
            knowledge of health and medicine.

      (111) QUALIFIED LONG TERM CARE INSURANCE POLICY shall mean a long-term care
            insurance policy issued on or after October 1, 2008, that has been pre-certified by the
            Tennessee Department of Commerce and Insurance pursuant to Rule 0780-01-61 as:

           (a)    A policy that meets all applicable Tennessee Long Term Care Partnership
                  requirements; or

           (b)    A policy that has been issued in another Partnership state and which is covered under
                  a reciprocal agreement between such other state and the State of Tennessee.

      (112) QUALIFIED UNINSURED PERSON shall mean an uninsured person who meets the
            technical, financial, and insurance requirements for the TennCare Standard Program.

      (113) QUALIFYING MEDICAL CONDITION shall mean a medical condition which is included
            among a list of conditions established by the Bureau and which will render a qualified
            uninsured applicant medically eligible.

      (114) READABLE shall mean easily understood language and format. See 42 C.F.R. § 438.10.

      (115) REASSIGNMENT shall mean the process by which the Bureau of TennCare transfers an
            enrollee from one MCO to another as described in these rules.

      (116) RECEIPT OF MAILED NOTICES shall mean that receipt of mailed notices is presumed to
            occur within five (5) days of mailing.

      (117) RECERTIFICATION shall have the same meaning as Redetermination.

      (118) RECONSIDERATION shall mean the mandatory process, triggered by an enrollee’s request
            for a SFH, by which an MCC reviews and renders a decision affirming or reversing the



October, 2025 (Revised)                             17
TENNCARE MEDICAID                                                                   CHAPTER 1200-13-13

(Rule 1200-13-13-.01, continued)
           MCC’s adverse benefit determination. An MCC satisfies the plan-level requirements of 42
           C.F.R. Part 438 Subpart F when the review includes all available, relevant, clinical
           documentation (including documentation which may not have been considered in the original
           review); is performed by a physician other than the original reviewing physician; and
           produces a timely written finding. See June 5, 2017, CMS letter from Jackie Glaze to Wendy
           Long, M.D., M.P.H.

     (119) REQUEST FOR REIMBURSEMENT shall mean a request from an enrollee for
           reimbursement of amounts paid out of pocket to providers for medical, dental or pharmacy
           services received. Enrollees seeking reimbursement are required to submit receipts or bills
           that include the following information: the amount paid by enrollee, a description of the
           prescriptions, care or services received, the date the prescriptions, care or services were
           received, and the name of the provider or pharmacy. All required information must be
           received from enrollees within the sixty (60) day timeframe to request reimbursement as
           prescribed by Rule 1200-13-13-.11(2)(d).

     (120) RESPONSIBLE PARTY(IES) shall mean the following individuals, who are representatives
           and/or relatives of recipients of medical assistance who are not financially eligible to receive
           benefits: parents, spouses, children, and guardians; as defined at Tennessee Code
           Annotated § 71-5-103(10).

     (121) SSI (SUPPLEMENTAL SECURITY INCOME) BENEFITS shall mean the benefits provided
           through a program administered by the Social Security Administration for those meeting
           program eligibility requirements. Tennessee residents determined eligible for SSI benefits are
           automatically enrolled in TennCare Medicaid.

     (122) STANDARD SPEND DOWN (SSD) shall mean the demonstration eligibility category
           composed of adults age twenty-one (21) and older who have been found to meet the criteria
           in Rule 1200-13-14-.02.

     (123) STATE FAIR HEARING (SFH) shall mean an evidentiary hearing requested by or on behalf
           of an enrollee to allow the enrollee to appeal an adverse benefit determination, which is
           conducted in accordance with 42 C.F.R. Part 431 Subpart E and the Tennessee Uniform
           Administrative Procedures Act, T.C.A. §§ 4-5-301, et seq. An initial order under T.C.A. § 4-5-
           314 shall be entered when an evidentiary hearing is held before a hearing officer. If any party
           appeals the initial order under T.C.A. § 4-5-315, the Commissioner may render a final order.

     (124) TARGETED PHARMACY. A pharmacy meeting one of the following criteria:

           (a)   It is located outside the State of Tennessee.

           (b)   It has had previous controlled substance violations with the Tennessee State Board of
                 Pharmacy.

           (c)   The Bureau has knowledge that the pharmacy is under investigation.

     (125) TECHNICAL ELIGIBILITY REQUIREMENTS shall mean the eligibility requirements
           applicable to the appropriate category of medical assistance as discussed in Chapter 1240-
           03-03-.03 of the rules of the TDHS - Division of Medical Services, and the additional eligibility
           requirements set forth in these rules.

     (126) TENNCARE shall mean the program administered by the Single State agency as designated
           by the State and CMS pursuant to Title XIX of the Social Security Act and the Section 1115
           Research and Demonstration waiver granted to the State of Tennessee.




October, 2025 (Revised)                             18
TENNCARE MEDICAID                                                                   CHAPTER 1200-13-13

(Rule 1200-13-13-.01, continued)
      (127) TENNCARE APPEAL FORM shall mean the TennCare form(s) which are completed by an
            enrollee or by a person authorized by the enrollee to do so, when an enrollee appeals an
            adverse benefit determination.

     (128) TENNCARE CHOICES in Long-Term Care shall mean the program described in Rule 1200-
           13-01-.05.

     (129) TENNCARE MEDICAID shall mean that part of the TennCare program, which covers
           persons eligible for Medicaid under Tennessee’s Title XIX State Plan for Medical Assistance.
           The following persons are eligible for TennCare Medicaid:

           (a)   Tennessee residents determined to be eligible for Medicaid in accordance with 1240-
                 03-03 of the rules of the Tennessee Department of Human Services - Division of
                 Medical Services.

           (b)   Individuals who qualify as dually eligible for Medicare and Medicaid are enrolled in
                 TennCare Medicaid.

           (c)   A Tennessee resident who is an uninsured woman, under age sixty-five (65), a U.S.
                 citizen or qualified alien, is not eligible for any other category of Medicaid, has been
                 diagnosed as the result of a screening at a Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
                 (CDC) site with breast or cervical cancer, including pre-cancerous conditions.

           (d)   Tennessee residents determined eligible for SSI benefits by the Social Security
                 Administration are automatically enrolled in TennCare Medicaid.

     (130) TENNCARE MEDICAID ELIGIBILITY REFORMS shall mean the amendments to the
           TennCare demonstration project approved by CMS on March 24, 2005, to close enrollment
           into TennCare Medicaid for non-pregnant adults age twenty-one (21) or older who qualify as
           Medically Needy under Tennessee’s Title XIX State Plan for Medical Assistance and to
           disenroll non-pregnant adults age twenty-one (21) or older who qualify as Medically Needy
           under Tennessee’s Title XIX State Plan for Medical Assistance after completion of their
           twelve (12) months of eligibility.

     (131) TENNCARE PHARMACY PROGRAMS shall mean any TennCare pharmacy carve-outs,
           including, but not limited to, enrollees with dual eligibility and all pharmacy services provided
           by the TennCare Managed Care Organizations (MCOs).

     (132) TENNCARE PROVIDER shall mean a provider who accepts as payment in full for furnishing
           benefits to a TennCare enrollee, the amounts paid pursuant to an approved agreement with
           an MCC or TennCare. Such payment may include copayments from the enrollee or the
           enrollee’s responsible party. TennCare providers must be enrolled with TennCare. TennCare
           providers must abide by all TennCare rules and regulations, including requirements regarding
           provider billing of patients as found in Rule 1200-13-13-.08. TennCare providers must be
           appropriately licensed for the services they deliver and must not be providers who have been
           excluded from participation in Medicare or Medicaid.

     (133) TENNCARE SELECT shall mean a state self-insured HMO established by the Bureau of
           TennCare and administered by a contractor to provide medical services to certain eligible
           enrollees.

     (134) TENNCARE SERVICES OR TENNCARE BENEFITS, for purposes of this rule, shall mean
           any medical assistance that is administered by the Bureau of TennCare or its contractors and
           which is funded wholly or in part with federal funds under the Medicaid Act or any waiver
           thereof, but excluding:




October, 2025 (Revised)                             19
TENNCARE MEDICAID                                                                     CHAPTER 1200-13-13

(Rule 1200-13-13-.01, continued)
           (a)   Medical assistance that can be appealed through an appeal of a pre-admission
                 evaluation (PAE) determination; and

            (b)   Medicare cost sharing services that do not involve utilization review by the Bureau of
                  TennCare or its contractors.

      (135) TENNCARE STANDARD shall mean that part of the TennCare Program which provides
            health coverage for Tennessee residents who are not eligible for Medicaid and who meet the
            eligibility criteria found in Rule 1200-13-14-.02.

      (136) TENNCARE STANDARD ELIGIBILITY REFORMS shall mean the amendments to the
            TennCare demonstration project approved by CMS on March 24, 2005, to terminate
            coverage for adults aged nineteen (19) and older in TennCare Standard eligibility groups.

      (137) TENNderCARE shall mean the name given to the preventive health care program for
            TennCare children.

      (138) TERMINATION shall mean the discontinuance of an enrollee’s coverage under the TennCare
            Medicaid or TennCare standard program.

      (139) THIRD PARTY shall mean any entity or funding source other than the enrollee or his/her
            responsible party, which is or may be liable to pay for all or a part of the costs of medical care
            of the enrollee.

      (140) TRANSITION GROUP shall mean existing Medicaid Medically Needy adults age twenty-one
            (21) or older enrolled as of October 5, 2007, who have not yet been assessed for transition to
            the Standard Spend Down Demonstration population for non-pregnant adults age twenty-one
            (21) or older.

      (141) TREATING PHYSICIAN (OR CLINICIAN) shall mean a health care provider who has
            provided diagnostic or treatment services for an enrollee (whether or not those services were
            covered by TennCare), for purposes of treating, or supporting the treatment of, a known or
            suspected medical condition. The term excludes providers who have evaluated an enrollee’s
            medical condition primarily or exclusively for the purposes of supporting or participating in a
            decision regarding TennCare coverage.

      (142) UNINSURED shall mean any person who does not have health insurance directly or
            indirectly through another family member, or who does not have access to group health
            insurance. For purposes of the Medicaid eligibility category of women under 65 requiring
            treatment for breast or cervical cancer, “Uninsured” shall mean any person who does not
            have health insurance or access to health insurance which covers treatment for breast or
            cervical cancer.

      (143) VALID FACTUAL DISPUTE shall mean a dispute which, if resolved in favor of the enrollee,
            would result in the proposed action not being taken.

Authority: T.C.A. §§ 4-3-1013, 4-5-202, 4-5-203, 4-5-208, 4-5-209, 71-5-102, 71-5-105, 71-5-107, 71-5-
109, 71-5-113, 71-5-134, 71-5-146, 71-5-197, and 71-5-198; 42 C.F.R. Part 431 Subpart E; 42 C.F.R.
Part 438 Subpart F; 42 C.F.R. Part 455 Subpart E; and Executive Order No. 23. Administrative History:
Public necessity rule filed July 1, 2002; effective through December 13, 2002. Original rule filed
September 30, 2002; to be effective December 14, 2002; however, on December 9, 2002, the House
Government Operations Committee of the General Assembly stayed Rule 1200-13-13-.01; new effective
date February 12, 2003. Emergency rule filed December 13, 2002; effective through May 27, 2003.
Amendment filed April 9, 2003; effective June 23, 2003. Public necessity rule filed May 5, 2005; effective
through October 17, 2005. Public necessity rule filed June 3, 2005; effective through November 15, 2005.
Amendment filed July 14, 2005; effective September 27, 2005. Amendment filed July 20, 2005; effective



October, 2025 (Revised)                              20
TENNCARE MEDICAID                                                                  CHAPTER 1200-13-13

(Rule 1200-13-13-.01, continued)
October 3, 2005. Amendment filed July 28, 2005; effective October 11, 2005. Amendment filed
September 1, 2005; effective November 15, 2005. Public necessity rule filed December 9, 2005; effective
through May 23, 2006. Public necessity rule filed December 29, 2005; effective through June 12, 2006.
Public necessity rules filed March 3, 2006; effective through August 15, 2006. Amendment filed March 3,
2006; effective May 17, 2006. Public necessity rule filed December 29, 2005; expired June 12, 2006. On
June 13, 2006, affected rules reverted to status on December 28, 2005. Amendments filed March 31,
2006; effective June 14, 2006. Amendment filed June 1, 2006; effective August 15, 2006. Public
necessity rule filed December 1, 2006; expired May 5, 2007. Public necessity rule filed February 2, 2007;
effective through July 16, 2007. Amendment filed January 26, 2007; effective April 11, 2007. Amendment
filed May 2, 2007; effective July 16, 2007. Amendment filed June 11, 2007; effective August 25, 2007.
Public necessity rule filed October 11, 2007; effective through March 24, 2008. Public necessity rule filed
February 8, 2008; effective through July 22, 2008. Amendments filed May 7, 2008; effective July 21,
2008. Public necessity rule filed September 8, 2008; effective through February 20, 2009. Amendment
filed December 5, 2008; effective February 18, 2009. Amendment filed February 18, 2009; effective May
4, 2009. Amendments filed September 25, 2009; effective December 24, 2009. Emergency rule filed
March 1, 2010; effective through August 28, 2010. Amendments filed May 27, 2010; effective August 25,
2010. Amendment filed July 1, 2013; effective September 29, 2013. Amendments filed October 3, 2013;
effective January 1, 2014. Amendment filed December 23, 2014; effective March 23, 2015. Emergency
rules filed July 1, 2016; effective through December 28, 2016. Amendment filed June 30, 2016; effective
September 28, 2016. Amendments filed September 30, 2016; effective December 29, 2016. Amendments
filed July 3, 2017; effective October 1, 2017. Amendments filed September 25, 2017; effective, December
24, 2017. Emergency rules filed April 15, 2021; effective through October 12, 2021. Amendments filed
June 29, 2021; effective September 27, 2021. Amendments filed July 8, 2021; effective October 6, 2021.
Amendments filed October 26, 2021; effective January 24, 2022. Emergency rules filed August 7, 2024;
effective through February 3, 2025. Amendments filed September 11, 2024; effective December 10,
2024. Amendments filed November 4, 2024; effective February 2, 2025.

1200-13-13-.02    ELIGIBILITY.

      (1)   Delineation of agency roles and responsibilities.

            (a)   The Tennessee Department of Finance and Administration (F&A) is the lead State
                  agency for the TennCare Program.

            (b)   The Bureau of TennCare (Bureau) is the administrative unit within F&A with the
                  responsibility for day-to-day operations of the TennCare Program. The Bureau is
                  responsible for establishing policy and procedural requirements and criteria for
                  TennCare.

                  1.    With respect to the eligibility of children applying for TennCare as medically
                        eligible persons, the Bureau is responsible for determining the presence of a
                        qualifying medical condition under TennCare Standard.

                  2.    With respect to the eligibility of individuals applying for the TennCare CHOICES
                        program, the Bureau is responsible for determining that the individual meets level
                        of care eligibility criteria for the long-term care services or reimbursement
                        requested. For enrollment into CHOICES Group 2, the Bureau is also
                        responsible for determining the state’s ability to provide appropriate Home and
                        Community Based Services (HCBS) as determined by the availability of slots
                        under the established enrollment target in accordance with Rule 1200-13-01-.05
                        and for confirming a determination by an Area Agency on Aging and Disability or
                        TennCare Managed Care Organization that:

                        (i)   The individual is an adult aged sixty-five (65) or older, or an adult aged
                              twenty-one (21) or older with physical disabilities; and




October, 2025 (Revised)                             21
TENNCARE MEDICAID                                                                       CHAPTER 1200-13-13

(Rule 1200-13-13-.02, continued)
                       (ii)  Such individual can be safely and appropriately served in the community
                             and at a cost that does not exceed the individual’s cost neutrality cap
                             pursuant to Rule 1200-13-01-.05.

                 3.    With respect to the eligibility of individuals applying for the ECF CHOICES
                       program, the Bureau is responsible for determining that the individual meets all
                       applicable eligibility and enrollment criteria, including target population, medical
                       or level of care eligibility, categorical and financial eligibility, the state’s ability to
                       provide appropriate ECF HCBS (as defined in Rule 1200-13-01-.02) as
                       determined by the availability of slots under the established enrollment target for
                       each ECF CHOICES Group in accordance with Rule 1200-13-01-.31 and
                       pursuant to intake and enrollment policies and processes described in 1200-13-
                       01-.31 and in TennCare policies and protocols, and for confirming a
                       determination by a TennCare Managed Care Organization that the individual can
                       be safely and appropriately served in the community and at a cost that does not
                       exceed the individual’s expenditure cap pursuant to Rule 1200-13-01-.31.

           (c)   The Tennessee Department of Human Services (DHS) is under contract with the
                 Bureau to determine initial eligibility for TennCare Medicaid and TennCare Standard,
                 as well as to redetermine, at regular intervals, whether eligibility should be continued.
                 DHS is not responsible for making decisions about the presence of a qualifying medical
                 condition for those applying as medically eligible persons under TennCare Standard.

           (d)   The Social Security Administration determines eligibility for the Supplemental Security
                 Income (SSI) Program. Tennessee residents determined eligible for SSI benefits are
                 automatically eligible for and enrolled in TennCare Medicaid benefits.

           (e)   The Tennessee Department of Health (DOH) determines presumptive eligibility under
                 TennCare Medicaid for pregnant women and for women diagnosed with breast or
                 cervical cancer through administration of the Breast and Cervical Cancer Screening
                 Program.

     (2)   Delineation of TennCare enrollee’s responsibilities.

           (a)   It is the responsibility of each TennCare enrollee to report to the DHS any material
                 change affecting any information given by the applicant/enrollee to DHS at the time of
                 application or redetermination of his eligibility. This information includes, but is not
                 limited to, changes in address, income, family size, employment, or access to
                 insurance. The applicant/enrollee shall mail, or present in person, documentation of
                 any such change to the DHS county office where the enrollee resides. This
                 documentation must be presented within the time frame specified in Chapter 1240-01-
                 16 of the rules of DHS.

           (b)   It is the responsibility of each TennCare enrollee to report to his provider that he is a
                 TennCare enrollee.

     (3)   Technical and financial eligibility requirements for TennCare Medicaid. To be eligible for
           TennCare Medicaid, each individual must:

           (a)   Meet all technical requirements applicable to the appropriate category of medical
                 assistance as described in the DHS - Division of Medical Services Rule 1240-03-03-
                 .02, and all financial eligibility requirements applicable to the appropriate category of
                 medical assistance as described in the DHS - Division of Medical Services Rule 1240-
                 03-03-.03; or




October, 2025 (Revised)                              22
TENNCARE MEDICAID                                                                      CHAPTER 1200-13-13

(Rule 1200-13-13-.02, continued)
           (b)   Meet the financial eligibility requirements of the SSI Program of the Social Security
                 Administration and be approved for SSI benefits by the Social Security Administration;
                 or

            (c)   Be a woman who:

                  1.    Is under age sixty-five (65);

                  2.    Is uninsured or has health insurance that does not provide coverage for
                        treatment of breast or cervical cancer;

                  3.    Is not eligible for Medicaid;

                  4.    Is a U.S. citizen or qualified alien; and

                  5.    Has been diagnosed with breast or cervical cancer, including a Precancerous
                        condition, by a screening at a Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)
                        site, and who needs treatment.

      (4)   General application requirements.

            (a)   By applying for TennCare Medicaid, an applicant agrees to provide information to the
                  Bureau, or its designee, about any third party coverage. MCCs shall release insurance
                  information from their files to the Bureau of TennCare on a regular basis, as required
                  by contract between the MCCs and the Department of Finance and Administration.

            (b)   By applying for TennCare Medicaid, an applicant grants permission and authorizes
                  release of information to the Bureau, or its designee, to investigate any and all
                  information provided, or any information not provided if it could affect eligibility, in order
                  to determine TennCare eligibility; and, if approved, the amount of, if any, cost sharing
                  which may be required of the applicant as found in these rules. Information may be
                  verified through, but not limited to, the following sources:

                  1.    The United States Internal Revenue Service (IRS);

                  2.    State income tax records for Tennessee or any other state where income is
                        earned;

                  3.    The Tennessee Department of Labor and Workforce Development, and other
                        employment security offices within any state where the applicant may have
                        received wages or been employed;

                  4.    Credit bureaus;

                  5.    Insurance companies; or

                  6.    Any other governmental agency or public or private source of information where
                        such information may impact an applicant’s eligibility or cost sharing
                        requirements for the TennCare Program.

            (c)   By applying for TennCare, an applicant understands it is a felony offense, pursuant to
                  Tennessee Code Annotated § 71-5-2601, to obtain TennCare coverage under false
                  means or to help anyone get on TennCare under false means.

     (5)    Current eligibility groups under TennCare Medicaid.




October, 2025 (Revised)                                 23
TENNCARE MEDICAID                                                                       CHAPTER 1200-13-13

(Rule 1200-13-13-.02, continued)
           (a)   Eligibility for TennCare Medicaid is currently limited to individuals who are Tennessee
                 residents as defined at 42 C.F.R. § 435.403, Tennessee Code Annotated § 71-5-120,
                 and who are listed in DHS rule Chapter 1240-03-02, Coverage Groups under Medicaid.

                  1.    Individuals enrolled as Categorically Needy, as defined at Rule 1200-13-13-.01.

                  2.    Individuals enrolled as Medically Needy, as defined at Rule 1200-13-13-.01.
                        Enrollment in this category is limited to pregnant women and children under the
                        age of twenty-one (21). Eligibility for this category shall be for a period of one (1)
                        year. At the end of that year, eligibility must be reestablished in order for these
                        individuals to continue in the program. For non-pregnant individuals who are
                        under age 21, eligibility in this category shall end when the individual reaches his
                        twenty-first birthday or the individual reaches the end of his one (1) year
                        eligibility, whichever comes first.

                  3.    Individuals who are determined eligible for the SSI Program by the Social
                        Security Administration.

                  4.    Women who have been enrolled as a result of needing treatment for breast or
                        cervical cancer and who meet the technical requirements found at 1200-13-13-
                        .02(3)(c).

            (b)   Effective date of eligibility.

                  1.    For SSI eligibles, the date determined by the Social Security Administration in
                        approving the individual for SSI coverage.

                  2.    For all other Medicaid eligibles, the date of the application or the date of the
                        qualifying event (such as the date that a spend-down obligation is met),
                        whichever is later.

                  3.    For persons applying for Medicaid eligibility during a period when the DHS offices
                        are not open, the date the faxed application is received at DHS.

      (6)   Redetermination of TennCare Medicaid eligibility.

            (a)   Enrollees eligible for TennCare Medicaid as a result of being eligible for SSI benefits
                  shall follow the Redetermination requirements of the Social Security Administration.

            (b)   An enrollee who qualifies for TennCare Medicaid through DHS shall have his
                  TennCare Medicaid eligibility redetermined as required by the appropriate category of
                  medical assistance as described in Chapter 1240-03-03 of the rules of DHS - Division
                  of Medical Services. Prior to termination of Medicaid eligibility for enrollees of the Core
                  Medicaid Population, eligibility will be reviewed in accordance with the following
                  process:

                  1.    At least thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of their current eligibility period, the
                        Bureau of TennCare will send a Request for Information to all Core Medicaid
                        enrollees. The Request for Information will include a form to be completed with
                        information needed to determine eligibility for open Medicaid categories.

                  2.    Enrollees will be given thirty (30) days inclusive of mail time from the date of the
                        Request for Information to return the completed form to DHS and to provide DHS
                        with the necessary verifications to determine eligibility for open Medicaid
                        categories.




October, 2025 (Revised)                               24
TENNCARE MEDICAID                                                                      CHAPTER 1200-13-13

(Rule 1200-13-13-.02, continued)
                 3.    Enrollees with a health problem, mental health problem, learning problem or a
                        disability will be given the opportunity to request assistance in responding to the
                        Request for Information. Enrollees with Limited English Proficiency will have the
                        opportunity to request translation assistance for responding to the Request for
                        Information.

                  4.     If an enrollee provides some but not all of the necessary information to DHS to
                         determine his eligibility for open Medicaid categories during the thirty (30) day
                         period following the Request for Information, DHS will send the enrollee a
                         Verification Request. The Verification Request will provide the enrollee with ten
                         (10) days inclusive of mail time to submit any missing information as identified in
                         the Verification Request.

                  5.     Enrollees who respond to the Request for Information within the thirty (30) day
                         period shall retain their eligibility for TennCare Medicaid (subject to any changes
                         in covered services generally applicable to enrollees in their Medicaid category)
                         while DHS reviews their eligibility for open Medicaid categories.

                  6.     Enrollees who respond to the Request for Information or the Verification Request
                         after the requisite time period specified in those notices but before the date of
                         termination shall retain their eligibility for TennCare Medicaid while DHS reviews
                         their eligibility for open Medicaid categories. If DHS determines that the enrollee
                         remains eligible for his current Medicaid category, the enrollee will remain
                         enrolled in such Medicaid category. If DHS makes a determination that the
                         enrollee is eligible for a different open Medicaid category, DHS will so notify the
                         enrollee and the enrollee will be enrolled in the new appropriate TennCare
                         Medicaid category. When the enrollee is enrolled in the appropriate TennCare
                         Medicaid category, his eligibility in the previous category shall be terminated
                         without additional notice. If a child is reviewed for Medicaid eligibility and is found
                         not to be eligible for any open Medicaid category, the child will be reviewed for
                         eligibility for TennCare Standard under Rule 1200-13-14-.02. If DHS makes a
                         determination that the enrollee is not eligible for any open Medicaid categories,
                         the TennCare Bureau will send the enrollee a twenty (20) day advance
                         Termination Notice.

                  7.     Individuals may provide the information and verifications specified in the Request
                         for Information after termination of eligibility. DHS shall review all such
                         information pursuant to the rules, policies and procedures of DHS and the
                         Bureau of TennCare applicable to new applicants for TennCare Medicaid
                         coverage. The individual shall not be entitled to be reinstated into TennCare
                         Medicaid pending this review. If the individual is subsequently determined to be
                         eligible for an open Medicaid category, he shall be granted retroactive coverage
                         to the date of application, or in the case of spend down eligibility for Medically
                         Needy pregnant women and children, to the latter of (a) the date of the
                         application, or (b) the date spend down eligibility is met.

            (c)   A woman who has been determined eligible for TennCare Medicaid under 1200-13-13-
                  .02(3)(c) of these rules shall annually recertify her eligibility in terms of continuation of
                  active treatment, her address, and access to health insurance. If she is found to no
                  longer be eligible through this review, the enrollee will be reviewed using the
                  Redetermination process set forth in 1200-13-13-.02(6)(b) of these rules.

      (7)   Termination of eligibility.

            (a)   Eligibility for TennCare Medicaid shall cease when:




October, 2025 (Revised)                               25
TENNCARE MEDICAID                                                                      CHAPTER 1200-13-13

(Rule 1200-13-13-.02, continued)
                 1.    The individual no longer qualifies for TennCare Medicaid pursuant to Chapter
                        1240-03-03 of the rules of DHS; or

                 2.    A woman determined eligible under 1200-13-13-.02(3)(c) of these rules:

                       (i)     Reaches age sixty-five (65); or

                       (ii)    Gains access to group health insurance that provides coverage for
                               treatment of breast or cervical cancer as defined elsewhere in these rules;
                               or

                       (iii)   It has been determined that she no longer needs treatment for breast or
                               cervical cancer, including pre-cancerous conditions.

           (b)   The TennCare Bureau will send Termination Notices to all Core Medicaid Population
                 enrollees being terminated pursuant to state and federal law who are not determined to
                 be eligible for open Medicaid categories pursuant to the Request for Information
                 processes described herein.

           (c)   Termination Notices will be sent twenty (20) days in advance of the date upon which
                 the coverage will be terminated.

           (d)   Termination Notices will provide enrollees with forty (40) days from the date of the
                 notice to appeal the termination and will inform enrollees how they may request a
                 hearing. Appeals will be processed by DHS in accordance with Rule 1200-13-13-.12.

           (e)   Enrollees with a health problem, mental health problem, learning problem or a disability
                 will be given the opportunity to request additional assistance for their appeal. Enrollees
                 with Limited English Proficiency will have the opportunity to request translation
                 assistance for their appeal.

     (8)   Disenrollment related to discontinued Medicaid categories.

           Prior to the disenrollment of any enrollee in a discontinued Medicaid category based on
           coverage terminations resulting from TennCare Medicaid Eligibility Reforms, Medicaid
           eligibility shall be reviewed in accordance with the following:

           (a)   Ex Parte Review.

                 DHS will conduct an ex parte review for open Medicaid categories for all enrollees in
                 eligibility groups due to be terminated as part of the TennCare Medicaid eligibility
                 reforms. Such ex parte review shall be conducted in accordance with federal
                 requirements as set forth by CMS in the Special Terms and Conditions of the
                 TennCare demonstration project.

           (b)   Request for Information.

                 1.    At least thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of their current eligibility period, the
                       Bureau of TennCare will send a Request for Information to enrollees in eligibility
                       groups being terminated pursuant to TennCare Medicaid eligibility reforms. The
                       Request for Information will include a form to be completed with information
                       needed to determine eligibility for open Medicaid categories, as well as a list of
                       the types of proof needed to verify certain information.

                 2.    Enrollees will be given thirty (30) days inclusive of mail time from the date of the
                       Request for Information to return the completed form to DHS and to provide DHS



October, 2025 (Revised)                              26
TENNCARE MEDICAID                                                                 CHAPTER 1200-13-13

(Rule 1200-13-13-.02, continued)
                        with the necessary verifications to determine eligibility for open Medicaid
                        categories.

                 3.   Enrollees with a health problem, mental health problem, learning problem or a
                      disability will be given the opportunity to request assistance in responding to this
                      Request for Information. Enrollees with Limited English Proficiency will have the
                      opportunity to request translation assistance for responding to the Request for
                      Information.

                 4.   Enrollees will be given an opportunity until the date of termination to request one
                      extension for good cause of the thirty (30) day time frame for responding to the
                      Request for Information. The good cause extension is intended to allow a limited
                      avenue for possible relief for certain enrollees who face significant unforeseen
                      circumstances, or who, as a result of a health problem, mental health problem,
                      learning problem, disability, or limited English proficiency, are unable to respond
                      timely. The good cause exception does not confer an entitlement upon enrollees
                      and the application of this exception will be within the discretion of DHS. Only
                      one (1) thirty (30) day good cause extension can be granted to each enrollee.
                      Good cause is determined by DHS eligibility staff. Good cause is not requested
                      nor determined by filing an appeal. Requests for an extension of the thirty (30)
                      day time frame to respond to the Request for Information must be initiated by the
                      enrollee. However, the enrollee may receive assistance in initiating such request.
                      DHS will not accept a request for extension of the thirty (30) day time frame
                      submitted by a family member, advocate, provider, or CMHC, acting on the
                      enrollee’s behalf without the involvement and knowledge of the enrollee, for
                      example, to allow time for such entity to locate the enrollee if his whereabouts
                      are unknown. All requests for a good cause extension must be made prior to
                      termination of Medicaid eligibility. A good cause extension will be granted if DHS
                      determines that a health problem, mental health problem, learning problem,
                      disability or limited English proficiency prevented an enrollee from understanding
                      or responding timely to the Request for Information. Except in the
                      aforementioned circumstances, a good cause extension will only be granted if
                      such request is submitted in writing to DHS prior to termination of Medicaid
                      eligibility and DHS determines that serious personal circumstances such as
                      illness or death prevent an enrollee from responding to the Request for
                      Information for an extended period of time. Proof of the serious personal
                      circumstances is required with the submission of the written request in order for a
                      good cause extension to be granted. Good cause extensions will be granted at
                      the sole discretion of DHS, and, if granted, shall provide the enrollee with an
                      additional thirty (30) days inclusive of mail time from the date of DHS’s decision
                      to grant the good cause extension. DHS will send the enrollee a letter granting or
                      denying the request for good cause extension. DHS’s decisions with respect to
                      good cause extensions shall not be appealable.

                 5.   If an enrollee provides some but not all of the necessary information to DHS to
                      determine his eligibility for open Medicaid categories during the thirty (30) day
                      period following the Request for Information, DHS will send the enrollee a
                      Verification Request. The Verification Request will provide the enrollee with ten
                      (10) days inclusive of mail time to submit any missing information as identified in
                      the Verification Request. Enrollees will not have the opportunity to request an
                      extension for good cause of the ten (10) day time frame for responding to the
                      Verification Request.

                 6.   Enrollees who respond to the Request for Information within the thirty (30) day
                      period or within any extension of such period granted by DHS shall retain their
                      eligibility for TennCare Medicaid (subject to any changes in covered services



October, 2025 (Revised)                           27
TENNCARE MEDICAID                                                                  CHAPTER 1200-13-13

(Rule 1200-13-13-.02, continued)
                        generally applicable to enrollees in their Medicaid category) while DHS reviews
                        their eligibility for open Medicaid categories.

                 7.    DHS shall review all information and verifications provided within the requisite
                       time period by an enrollee pursuant to the Request for Information and/or
                       Verification Request to determine whether the enrollee is eligible for any open
                       Medicaid categories. If DHS makes a determination that the enrollee is eligible
                       for an open Medicaid category, DHS will so notify the enrollee and the enrollee
                       will be enrolled in the appropriate Medicaid category. When the enrollee is
                       enrolled in the appropriate TennCare Medicaid category, his eligibility in the
                       discontinued Medicaid category shall be terminated without additional notice. If
                       DHS makes a determination that the enrollee is not eligible for any open
                       Medicaid categories or if an enrollee does not respond to the Request for
                       Information within the requisite thirty (30) day time period or any extension of
                       such period granted by DHS, the TennCare Bureau will send the enrollee a
                       twenty (20) day advance Termination Notice.

                 8.    Enrollees who respond to the Request for Information or the Verification Request
                       after the requisite time period specified in those notices or after any extension of
                       such time period granted by DHS but before the date of termination shall retain
                       their eligibility for TennCare Medicaid (subject to any changes in covered
                       services generally applicable to enrollees in their Medicaid category) while DHS
                       reviews their eligibility for open Medicaid categories. If DHS makes a
                       determination that the enrollee is eligible for an open Medicaid category, DHS
                       will so notify the enrollee, and the enrollee will be enrolled in the appropriate
                       TennCare Medicaid category, and his eligibility in the discontinued Medicaid
                       category shall be terminated without additional notice. If DHS makes a
                       determination that the enrollee is not eligible for any open Medicaid categories,
                       the TennCare Bureau will send the enrollee a twenty-(20) day advance
                       Termination Notice.

                 9.    Individuals may provide information and verifications specified in the Request for
                       Information after termination of eligibility. DHS shall review all such information
                       pursuant to the rules, policies and procedures of DHS and the Bureau of
                       TennCare applicable to new applicants for TennCare coverage. The individual
                       shall not be entitled to be reinstated into TennCare pending this review. If the
                       individual is subsequently determined to be eligible for an open Medicaid
                       category, he shall be granted retroactive coverage to the date of application, or in
                       the case of spend down eligibility for Medically Needy pregnant women and
                       children, to the latter of (a) the date of application, or (b) the date spend down
                       eligibility is met.

           (c)   Termination Notice.

                 1.    The TennCare Bureau will send Termination Notices to all enrollees being
                       terminated pursuant to TennCare Medicaid eligibility reforms who are not
                       determined to be eligible for open Medicaid categories pursuant to the Ex Parte
                       Review or Request for Information processes described in this subparagraph.

                 2.    Termination Notices will be sent twenty (20) days in advance of the date upon
                       which the coverage will be terminated.

                 3.    Termination Notices will provide enrollees with forty (40) days from the date of
                       the notice to appeal valid factual disputes related to the disenrollment and will
                       inform enrollees how they may request a hearing.




October, 2025 (Revised)                            28
TENNCARE MEDICAID                                                                     CHAPTER 1200-13-13

(Rule 1200-13-13-.02, continued)
                 4.    Enrollees with a health problem, mental health problem, learning problem, or a
                        disability will be given the opportunity to request additional assistance for their
                        appeal. Enrollees with Limited English Proficiency will have the opportunity to
                        request translation assistance for their appeal.

                  5.      Enrollees will not have the opportunity to request an extension for good cause of
                          the forty (40) day time frame in which to request a hearing.

Authority: T.C.A. §§ 4-5-202, 4-5-208, 4-5-209, 71-5-105, and 71-5-109 and Executive Order No. 23.
Administrative History: Public necessity rule filed July 1, 2002; effective through December 13, 2002.
Original rule filed September 30, 2002; to be effective December 14, 2002; however, on December 9,
2002, the House Government Operations Committee of the General Assembly stayed Rule 1200-13-13-
.02; new effective date February 12, 2003. Emergency rule filed December 13, 2002; effective through
May 27, 2003. Amendment filed April 9, 2003; effective June 23, 2003. Public necessity rule filed April 29,
2005, effective through October 11, 2005. Public necessity rule filed June 3, 2005; effective through
November 15, 2005. Amendment filed July 28, 2005; effective October 11, 2005. Amendments filed
September 1, 2005; effective November 15, 2005. Public necessity rule filed December 9, 2005; effective
through May 23, 2006. Public necessity rule filed March 3, 2006; effective through August 15, 2006.
Amendment filed March 3, 2006; effective May 17, 2006. Amendment filed June 1, 2006; effective August
15, 2006. Public necessity rule filed February 8, 2008; effective through July 22, 2008. Repeal and new
rule filed May 7, 2008; effective July 21, 2008. Emergency rule filed March 1, 2010; effective through
August 28, 2010. Amendment filed May 27, 2010; effective August 25, 2010. Amendment filed October
26, 2010; effective January 24, 2011. Amendment filed September 26, 2013; effective December 25,
2013. Emergency rules filed July 1, 2016; effective through December 28, 2016. Amendments filed
September 30, 2016; effective December 29, 2016.

1200-13-13-.03 ENROLLMENT, REASSIGNMENT, AND DISENROLLMENT WITH MANAGED CARE
CONTRACTORS (MCCS).

      (1)   Enrollment.

            There are three (3) different types of managed care entities that provide services to
            TennCare enrollees. Enrollment procedures differ according to the type of managed care
            entity, the geographic area, and the number of managed care entities operating in each
            geographic area. Enrollment procedures also differ for ECF CHOICES, as described in
            subparagraph (c) below.

            (a)   TennCare Managed Care Organizations (MCOs) other than TennCare Select.

                  1.      Except as provided in subparagraph (c), individuals or families determined
                          eligible for TennCare shall select a health plan (Managed Care
                          Organization/MCO) at the time of application. The health plan must be available
                          in the Grand Division of the State in which the enrollee lives. All family members
                          living in the same household and enrolled in TennCare must be assigned to the
                          same MCO except children determined by the Bureau to be eligible to enroll in
                          TennCare Select. An enrollee is given his choice of MCOs when possible. If the
                          requested MCO cannot accept new enrollees, the Bureau will assign each
                          enrollee to an MCO that is accepting new enrollees. If no MCO is available to
                          enroll new members in the enrollee’s Grand Division, the enrollee will be
                          assigned to TennCare Select until such time as another MCO becomes
                          available. The Bureau may also assign TennCare children with special health
                          care needs to TennCare Select.

                          Individuals enrolled as a result of being eligible for SSI benefits will be assigned
                          to an MCO as they do not have the opportunity to select a health plan prior to the




October, 2025 (Revised)                               29
TENNCARE MEDICAID                                                                 CHAPTER 1200-13-13

(Rule 1200-13-13-.03, continued)
                        effective date of coverage, since they are enrolled through the Social Security
                        Administration.

                 2.    Except as provided in subparagraph (c), a TennCare enrollee may change MCOs
                       one (1) time within the initial ninety (90) calendar days (inclusive of mail time)
                       from the date of the letter informing him of his MCO assignment, if there is
                       another MCO in the enrollee’s Grand Division that is currently permitted by the
                       Bureau to accept new enrollees. No additional changes will be allowed except as
                       otherwise specified in these rules. An enrollee shall remain a member of the
                       designated plan until he is given an opportunity to change once each year during
                       an annual change period. The annual change period will occur each year in
                       March for enrollees in West Tennessee, in May for enrollees in Middle
                       Tennessee, and in July for enrollees in East Tennessee. Thereafter, an MCO
                       change is permitted only during an annual change period, unless the Bureau
                       authorizes a change as the result of the resolution of an appeal requesting a
                       “hardship” reassignment as specified in paragraph (2)(b) below. When an
                       enrollee changes MCOs, the enrollee’s medical care will be the responsibility of
                       the current MCO until he is enrolled in the requested MCO.

                 3.    Each MCO shall offer its enrollees, to the extent possible, freedom of choice
                       among participating providers. If after notification of enrollment the enrollee has
                       not chosen a primary care provider, one will be selected for him by the MCO.
                       The period during which an enrollee may choose his primary care provider shall
                       not be less than fifteen (15) calendar days.

                 4.    In the event a pregnant woman entering an MCO’s plan is receiving medically
                       necessary prenatal care the day before enrollment, the MCO shall be
                       responsible for the costs of continuation of such medically necessary services,
                       without any form of prior approval and without regard to whether such services
                       are being provided within or outside the MCO’s provider network until such time
                       as the MCO can reasonably transfer the enrollee to a service and/or network
                       provider without impeding service delivery that might be harmful to the enrollee’s
                       health.

                       In the event a pregnant woman entering the MCO’s plan is in her second or third
                       trimester of pregnancy and is receiving medically necessary prenatal care
                       services the day before enrollment, the MCO shall be responsible for providing
                       continued access to the provider (regardless of network affiliation) through the
                       postpartum period. Reimbursement to an out-of-network provider shall be as set
                       out in Rule 1200-13-13-.08.

           (b)   TennCare Select.

                 TennCare Select is a prepaid inpatient health plan (PIHP), as defined in 42 C.F.R. §
                 438.2, which operates in all areas of the State and covers the same services as the
                 MCOs. The State’s TennCare Select contractor is reimbursed on a non-risk, non-
                 capitated basis for services rendered to covered populations, and in addition receives
                 fees from the State to offset administrative costs.

                 1.    The TennCare populations included in the TennCare Select delivery system are
                       as follows:

                       (i)   Children under the age of twenty-one (21) years who are eligible for
                             Supplemental Security Income.




October, 2025 (Revised)                           30
TENNCARE MEDICAID                                                                    CHAPTER 1200-13-13

(Rule 1200-13-13-.03, continued)
                       (ii)  Children in state custody and children leaving state custody for six (6)
                             months post-custody as long as the child remains eligible.

                       (iii)   Children under the age of twenty-one (21) years in an institutional eligibility
                               category who are receiving care in a Nursing Facility or an Intermediate
                               Care Facility for persons with Mental Retardation (or pursuant to federal
                               law, Intermediate Care Facility for the Mentally Retarded) (ICF/MR), and
                               children and adults in a Home and Community Based Services 1915(c)
                               waiver for individuals with mental retardation.

                       (iv)    Enrollees living in areas where there is insufficient MCO capacity to serve
                               them.

                       After being assigned to TennCare Select, persons in categories (i) and (iii) above
                       may choose to disenroll from TennCare Select and enroll in another MCO if one
                       is available. Persons in categories (ii) and (iv) must remain in TennCare Select.
                       TennCare Select is not open to voluntary selection by TennCare enrollees.

                 2.    TennCare Select also provides the following functions:

                       (i)     It is the back-up plan should one of the MCOs leave the TennCare
                               program unexpectedly. For TennCare enrollees previously enrolled with
                               the MCO, TennCare Select provides medical case management and all
                               MCO covered services.

                       (ii)    It is the only entity responsible for payment of the services described in 42
                               C.F.R. § 431.52, services provided to residents temporarily absent from
                               the State, and provides all MCO covered services (primarily emergency
                               services).

                       (iii)   It is the only entity responsible for payment of the services described in 42
                               C.F.R. § 440.255, limited services for certain aliens.

           (c)   TennCare Managed Care Organizations (MCOs) for ECF CHOICES. Individuals
                 enrolled in ECF CHOICES may select from only the MCOs participating in ECF
                 CHOICES.

                 1.    If an individual enrolled in an MCO other than an ECF CHOICES participating
                       MCO wants to enroll in the ECF CHOICES program, the individual must choose
                       to enroll in an ECF CHOICES participating MCO in order to enroll in ECF
                       CHOICES.

                 2.    If an individual enrolled in the ECF CHOICES program elects to transition to an
                       MCO that is not participating in ECF CHOICES, the individual is choosing to
                       voluntarily disenroll from ECF CHOICES. Because this is a voluntary decision,
                       advance notice and the right to a fair hearing shall not be provided. However, the
                       individual may elect to transition back to an ECF CHOICES participating MCO in
                       order to resume enrollment in ECF CHOICES.

           (d)   TennCare Dental Benefits Manager (DBM).

                 TennCare Enrollees shall be assigned to the Dental Benefits Manager (DBM) under
                 contract with the Bureau to provide dental benefits as set out in Rule .04, Dental
                 Services. TennCare adults age 21 and older enrolled in ECF CHOICES or a 1915(c)
                 Waiver program shall also receive Adult Dental Services, as outlined in Chapter 1200-
                 13-01.



October, 2025 (Revised)                              31
TENNCARE MEDICAID                                                                 CHAPTER 1200-13-13

(Rule 1200-13-13-.03, continued)

           (e)   TennCare Pharmacy Benefits Manager (PBM).

                 TennCare enrollees who are eligible to receive pharmacy services shall be assigned to
                 the Pharmacy Benefits Manager (PBM) under contract with the Bureau to provide
                 pharmacy benefits for both medical and behavioral health services through the
                 TennCare Program.

     (2)   Reassignment.

           (a)   Reassignment to an MCO other than the current MCO in which the TennCare enrollee
                 is enrolled is subject to another MCO’s capacity to accept new enrollees and must be
                 approved by the Bureau of TennCare in accordance with one of the following:

                 1.    During the initial ninety (90) day period following notification of MCO assignment
                       as described at Rule 1200-13-13-.03, a TennCare enrollee may request a
                       change of MCOs.

                 2.    A TennCare enrollee must change MCOs if he moves outside the MCO’s Grand
                       Division, and that MCO is not authorized to operate in the enrollee’s new place of
                       residence. Until the TennCare enrollee selects or is assigned to a new MCO and
                       his enrollment is deemed complete, his medical care will remain the
                       responsibility of the original MCO.

                 3.    If an enrollee’s MCO withdraws from participation in the TennCare Program,
                       TennCare will assign him to an MCO operating in his Grand Division, if one is
                       available. The enrollee will be provided notice of the change and will have ninety
                       (90) days to select another MCO in his Grand Division. If no MCO is available to
                       accept enrollees from an exiting plan, the enrollees will be assigned to TennCare
                       Select until such time as another MCO becomes available.

                 4.    An enrollee shall be given an opportunity to change MCOs once each year
                       during an annual change period. Only one (1) MCO change is permitted every
                       twelve (12) months, unless the Bureau authorizes a change as the result of the
                       resolution of an appeal requesting a “hardship” reassignment. When an enrollee
                       changes MCOs, the enrollee’s medical care will be the responsibility of the
                       current MCO until enrolled in the requested MCO. If an enrollee changes MCOs
                       during an annual change period, all family members living in the same household
                       and enrolled in TennCare shall also be changed except children enrolled in
                       TennCare Select.

           (b)   A TennCare enrollee may change MCOs if the TennCare Bureau has granted a
                 request for a change in MCOs or an appeal of a denial of a request for a change in
                 MCOs has been resolved in his favor based on hardship criteria.

                 1.    The following situations will not be determined to be “hardships”:

                       (i)     The enrollee is unhappy with the current MCO or primary care provider
                               (PCP), but there is no hardship medical situation (as stated in Part 2.
                               below);

                       (ii)    The enrollee claims lack of access to services but the plan meets the
                               state’s access standard;

                       (iii)   The enrollee is unhappy with a current PCP or other providers, and has
                               refused alternative PCP or provider choices offered by the MCO;



October, 2025 (Revised)                           32
TENNCARE MEDICAID                                                                   CHAPTER 1200-13-13

(Rule 1200-13-13-.03, continued)

                       (iv)    The enrollee is concerned that a current provider might drop out of the plan
                               in the future;

                       (v)     The enrollee is a Medicare beneficiary who (with the exception of
                               pharmacy) may utilize choice of providers, regardless of network affiliation;
                               or

                       (vi)    The enrollee’s PCP is no longer in the MCO’s network, the enrollee wants
                               to continue to see the current PCP and has refused alternative PCP or
                               provider choices offered by the MCO.

                 2.    Requests for hardship MCO reassignments must meet all of the following six (6)
                       hardship criteria for reassignment. Determinations will be made on an individual
                       basis.

                       (i)     A member has a medical condition that requires complex, extensive, and
                               ongoing care; and

                       (ii)    The member’s specialist has stopped participating in the member’s current
                               MCO network and has refused continuation of care to the member in his
                               current MCO assignment; and

                       (iii)   The ongoing medical condition of the member is such that another
                               physician or provider with appropriate expertise would be unable to take
                               over his care without significant and negative impact on his care; and

                       (iv)    The current MCO has been unable to negotiate continued care for this
                               member with the current specialist; and

                       (v)     The current provider of services is in the network of one or more alternative
                               MCOs; and

                       (vi)    An alternative MCO is available to enrolled members (i.e., has not given
                               notice of withdrawal from the TennCare Program, is not in receivership,
                               and is not at member capacity for the member’s region).

                 Requests to change MCOs submitted by TennCare enrollees shall be evaluated in
                 accordance with the hardship criteria referenced above. If an enrollee’s request to
                 change MCOs is granted due to hardship, all family members living in the same
                 household and enrolled in TennCare will be assigned to the new MCO except children
                 determined by the Bureau to be eligible to enroll in TennCare Select. Upon denial of a
                 request to change MCOs, enrollees shall be provided notice and appeal rights as
                 described in applicable provisions of Rule 1200-13-13-.11.

           (c)   Members receiving long-term services and supports.

                 1.    In the event that a CHOICES member is determined, based on an assessment of
                       needs, to require a long-term care service that is not currently available under
                       the MCO in which he is currently enrolled, but that is available through another
                       MCO, the Bureau shall work with the current MCO to arrange for provision of the
                       required service, which may involve providing such service out-of-network. It
                       shall be considered to be a hardship reason to change MCO assignment only if
                       the current MCO, after working with the Bureau, is unable to provide the required
                       service. In such cases, the MCO that is unable to provide the required service
                       after working with the Bureau may be subject to sanctions.



October, 2025 (Revised)                             33
TENNCARE MEDICAID                                                                CHAPTER 1200-13-13

(Rule 1200-13-13-.03, continued)

                 2.    A CHOICES or ECF CHOICES member may request and shall have cause to
                       change MCO assignment if all of the following are met:

                       (i)     The member receives institutional, residential, or employment support
                               services in the MLTSS program in which he is enrolled;

                       (ii)    The member’s institutional, residential, or employment support services
                               provider has stopped participating in the member’s MCO network and has
                               refused continuation of care to the member in his current MCO
                               assignment;

                       (iii)   The member’s current MCO has been unable to negotiate continued
                               services for the member with the current provider;

                       (iv)    The member would have to change his residential, institutional, or
                               employment supports provider based on that provider’s change in status
                               from an in-network to an out-of-network provider with the MCO;

                       (v)     As a result, the member would experience a disruption in his residence or
                               employment;

                       (vi)    The current institutional, residential, or employment support services
                               provider is in the network of one or more alternative MCOs; and

                       (vii)   The alternative MCO the member has selected is available to enroll
                               members (i.e., has not given notice of withdrawal from the TennCare
                               Program, is not in receivership, and is not at member capacity for the
                               member’s region).

           (d)   Enrollees who are out-of-state on a temporary basis, but maintain their status as
                 Tennessee residents under federal and state laws, shall be reassigned to TennCare
                 Select for the period they are out-of-state.

           (e)   TennCare shall only accept a request to change MCO assignment from the affected
                 enrollee, his parent, guardian, spouse, child over age eighteen (18), or responsible
                 party as defined in Rule 1200-13-13-.01.

     (3)   Disenrollment.

           (a)   When it has been determined that an individual no longer meets the criteria for
                 TennCare eligibility, that individual shall be disenrolled from the TennCare Program,
                 including the CHOICES and ECF CHOICES program, as applicable. Services provided
                 by the TennCare MCO in which the individual has been enrolled, as well as the PBM
                 and DBM, if applicable, shall be terminated upon disenrollment. Such disenrollment
                 action will be accompanied by appropriate due process procedures as described
                 elsewhere in this Chapter. Disenrollment from the CHOICES program shall proceed as
                 described in Rule 1200-13-01-.05. Disenrollment from the ECF CHOICES program
                 shall proceed as described in Rule 1200-13-01-.31.

           (b)   Coverage shall cease at 12:00 midnight, local time, on the date that an individual is
                 disenrolled from TennCare.

           (c)   TennCare may reassign individuals from a designated MCO and place them in another
                 MCO as described elsewhere in these rules. A TennCare MCO may not reassign an




October, 2025 (Revised)                            34
TENNCARE MEDICAID                                                                  CHAPTER 1200-13-13

(Rule 1200-13-13-.03, continued)
                 enrollee without the permission of TennCare. A TennCare MCO shall not request the
                 reassignment of a TennCare enrollee for any of the following reasons:

                  1.    Adverse changes in the enrollee’s health;

                  2.    Pre-existing medical conditions; or

                  3.    High cost medical bills.

                  Coverage by a particular MCO shall cease at 12:00 midnight local time on the date that
                  an individual has been reassigned by TennCare from one MCO and placed in another
                  plan. Coverage by the new MCO will begin when coverage by the old MCO ends.

Authority: T.C.A. §§ 4-5-202, 4-5-203, 4-5-208, 4-5-209, 71-5-105, 71-5-107, and 71-5-109 and
Executive Order No. 23. Administrative History: Public necessity rule filed July 1, 2002; effective
through December 13, 2002. Original rule filed September 30, 2002; to be effective December 14, 2002;
however, on December 9, 2002, the House Government Operations Committee of the General Assembly
stayed Rule 1200-13-13-.03; new effective date February 12, 2003. Emergency rule filed December 13,
2002; effective through May 27, 2003. Public necessity rule filed April 29, 2005; effective through October
11, 2005. Amendments filed July 28, 2005; effective October 11, 2005. Public necessity rule filed
December 29, 2005; expired June 12, 2006. On June 13, 2006, affected rules reverted to status on
December 28, 2005. Amendment filed March 31, 2006; effective June 14, 2006. Amendment filed August
14, 2006; effective October 28, 2006. Public necessity rule filed February 8, 2008; effective through July
22, 2008. Repeal and new rule filed May 7, 2008; effective July 21, 2008. Amendments filed September
25, 2009; effective December 24, 2009. Amendment filed November 30, 2009; effective February 28,
2010. Emergency rule filed March 1, 2010; effective through August 28, 2010. Amendments filed May 27,
2010; effective August 25, 2010. Amendments filed October 26, 2010; effective January 24, 2011.
Emergency rules filed July 1, 2016; effective through December 28, 2016. Amendments filed September
30, 2016; effective December 29, 2016. Amendments filed September 25, 2017; effective December 24,
2017. Amendments filed July 8, 2021; effective October 6, 2021. Amendments filed February 16, 2022;
effective May 17, 2022. Emergency rules filed December 27, 2022 to become effective January 1, 2023;
effective through June 30, 2023. Amendments filed January 19, 2023; effective April 19, 2023.

1200-13-13-.04 COVERED SERVICES.

      (1)   Benefits Covered Under the Managed Care Program.

            (a)   TennCare MCCs shall cover the following services and benefits subject to any
                  applicable limitations described in this Chapter. TennCare MCCs shall cover TennCare
                  CHOICES services and benefits for individuals enrolled in the TennCare CHOICES
                  program in accordance with Rule 1200-13-01-.05 and ECF CHOICES services and
                  benefits for individuals enrolled in the ECF CHOICES program in accordance with Rule
                  1200-13-01-.31.

                  1.    Any and all medically necessary services may require prior authorization or
                        approval by the MCC, except where prohibited by law.

                  2.    An MCC shall not refuse to pay for a service solely because of a lack of prior
                        authorization as follows:

                        (i)   EPSDT services. MCCs shall provide all medically necessary, covered
                              services regardless of whether the need for such services was identified by
                              a provider whose services had received prior authorization from the MCC
                              or by an in-network provider.




October, 2025 (Revised)                             35
TENNCARE MEDICAID                                                                       CHAPTER 1200-13-13

(Rule 1200-13-13-.04, continued)
                       (ii)  Emergency services. MCCs shall not require prior authorization or
                             approval for covered services rendered in the event of an emergency, as
                             defined in these rules. Such emergency services may be reviewed on the
                             basis of medical necessity or other MCC administrator requirements, but
                             cannot be denied solely because the provider did not obtain prior
                             authorization or approval from the enrollee’s MCC.

                  3.       MCCs shall not impose any service limitations that are more restrictive than
                           those described herein; however, this shall not limit the MCC’s ability to establish
                           procedures for the determination of medical necessity.

                  4.       Services for which there is no federal financial participation (FFP) are not
                           covered.

                  5.       Non-covered services are non-covered regardless of medical necessity.

            (b)   The following physical health and mental health benefits are covered under the
                  TennCare managed care program. Benefits offered under the TennCare CHOICES
                  program are also covered under the TennCare managed care program, as described in
                  Rule 1200-13-01-.05. Benefits offered under the ECF CHOICES program are also
                  covered under the TennCare managed care program, as described in Rule 1200-13-
                  01-.31. There are some exclusions to the benefits listed below. The exclusions are
                  listed in this rule and in Rule 1200-13-13-.10.

SERVICE                      BENEFIT FOR PERSONS                   BENEFIT FOR PERSONS AGED 21
                             UNDER AGE 21                          AND OLDER
1. Ambulance Services.       See “Emergency Air and Ground         See “Emergency Air and Ground
                             Transportation” and “Non-             Transportation” and “Non-Emergency
                             Emergency Ambulance                   Ambulance Transportation.”
                             Transportation.”
2. Bariatric Surgery,        Covered as medically necessary.       Covered as medically necessary.
defined as surgery to
induce weight loss.
3. Chiropractic Services     Covered as medically necessary.       Covered as medically necessary.
[defined at 42 C.F.R. §
440.60(b)].
4. Community Health          Covered as medically necessary.       Covered as medically necessary.
Services, [defined at 42
C.F.R. § 440.20(b) and
(c) and 42 C.F.R. §
440.90].
5. Dental Services           Preventive, diagnostic, and           Services from within each of the following
[defined at 42 C.F.R. §      treatment services covered as         categories are covered as medically
440.100].                    medically necessary.                  necessary:

                             Dental services under EPSDT are       (A) Diagnostic x-rays and exams;
                             provided in accordance with the
                             state’s periodicity schedule as       (B) Preventative cleanings;
                             determined after consultation with
                             recognized dental organizations       (C) Topical fluoride treatments and caries
                             and at other intervals as medically   arresting medicament;
                             necessary.
                                                                   (D) Restorative (fillings);
                             Orthodontic services must be
                             prior authorized by the Dental        (E) Endodontics;
                             Benefits Manager (DBM).



October, 2025 (Revised)                                36
TENNCARE MEDICAID                                                                    CHAPTER 1200-13-13

(Rule 1200-13-13-.04, continued)
SERVICE                  BENEFIT FOR PERSONS                    BENEFIT FOR PERSONS AGED 21
                         UNDER AGE 21                           AND OLDER
                         Orthodontic services are only          (F) Scaling and root planing;
                         covered for individuals under age
                         21. Effective October 1, 2013,         (G) Full mouth debridement;
                         TennCare reimbursement for
                         orthodontic treatment approved         (H) Crowns;
                         and begun before age 21 will end
                         on the individual’s 21st birthday.     (I) Partial Dentures;
                         For individuals receiving
                         treatment prior to October 1,          (J) Complete dentures;
                         2013, such treatment may
                         continue until completion as long      (K) Immediate complete dentures and
                         as the enrollee remains eligible       complete denture relines;
                         for TennCare.
                                                                (L) Tooth extraction;
                          Orthodontic treatment is not
                          covered unless it is medically        (M) Alveoloplasty;
                          necessary to treat a handicapping
                          malocclusion. Cleft palate,           (N) Removal of lateral exostosis;
                          hemifacial microsomia, or
                          mandibulofacial dysostosis shall      (O) Removal of torus palatinus;
                          be considered handicapping
                          malocclusions.                        (P) Removal of torus mandibularis;

                          A TennCare-approved                   (Q) Palliative treatment; and
                          Malocclusion Severity
                          Assessment (MSA) will be              (R) Nitrous oxide inhalation sedation.
                          conducted to measure the
                          severity of the malocclusion. An      A current list of the specific procedure
                          MSA score of 28 or higher, as         codes covered within this rule and
                          determined by the DBM’s dentist       TennCare’s “Dental Office Reference
                          reviewer(s), will be used for         Manual” shall be made available on the
                          making orthodontic treatment          TennCare website at tn.gov/tenncare.
                          determinations of medical
                          necessity. However, an MSA
                          score alone cannot be used to
                          deny orthodontic treatment.

                          Orthodontic treatment will not be
                          authorized for cosmetic purposes.
                          Orthodontic treatment will be paid
                          for by TennCare only as long as
                          the individual remains eligible for
                          TennCare.

                          The MCO is responsible for the
                          provision of transportation to and
                          from covered dental services, as
                          well as the medical and
                          anesthesia services related to the
                          covered dental services.
6. Durable Medical        Covered as medically necessary.       Covered as medically necessary.
Equipment [defined at
42 C.F.R. §
440.70(b)(3)].



October, 2025 (Revised)                            37
TENNCARE MEDICAID                                                                   CHAPTER 1200-13-13

(Rule 1200-13-13-.04, continued)
SERVICE                  BENEFIT FOR PERSONS                     BENEFIT FOR PERSONS AGED 21
                         UNDER AGE 21                            AND OLDER
7. Emergency Air and     Covered as medically necessary.         Covered as medically necessary.
Ground Transportation
[defined at 42 C.F.R. §
440.170(a)(1) and (3)].
8. EPSDT Services,       Screening and interperiodic             Not applicable. (EPSDT is for persons
[defined at 42 C.F.R. §  screening covered in accordance         under age 21.)
441, Subpart B].         with federal regulations.
                         (Interperiodic screens are screens
                         in between regular checkups
                         which are covered if a parent or
                         caregiver suspects there may be
                         a problem.)

                           Diagnostic and follow-up
                           treatment services covered as
                           medically necessary and in
                           accordance with federal
                           regulations.

                           The periodicity schedule for child
                           health screens is that set forth in
                           the latest “American Academy of
                           Pediatrics Recommendations for
                           Preventive Pediatric Health Care.”
                           All components of the screens
                           must be consistent with the latest
                           “American Academy of Pediatrics
                           Recommendations for Preventive
                           Pediatric Health Care.”
9. Health Home             Covered as medically necessary.       Covered as medically necessary.
Services for Persons
with Serious and
Persistent Mental
Illness [described at 42
U.S.C. § 1396w-
4(h)(4)].
10. Home Health Care       Covered as medically necessary        Covered as medically necessary in
[defined at 42 C.F.R. §    in accordance with the definition     accordance with the definition of Home
440.70(a), (b), (c), and   of Home Health Care at Rule           Health Care at Rule 1200-13-13-.01. Prior
(e) and at Rule 1200-      1200-13-13-.01. Prior                 authorization required for home health
13-13-.01].                authorization required for home       nurse and home health aide services, as
                           health nurse and home health          described in Paragraph (6) of this rule.
                           aide services, as described in
                           Paragraph (6) of this rule.           All home health care must be delivered by
                                                                 a licensed Home Health Agency, as
                           All home health care must be          defined by 42 C.F.R. § 440.70.
                           delivered by a licensed Home
                           Health Agency, as defined by 42
                           C.F.R. § 440.70.
11. Hospice Care           Covered as medically necessary.       Covered as medically necessary.
[defined at 42 C.F.R.,
Part 418].                 Must be provided by an                Must be provided by an organization
                           organization certified pursuant to    certified pursuant to Medicare Hospice
                           Medicare Hospice requirements.        requirements.
12. Infant Diapers.        Infant Diapers, as defined by Rule    Not Covered.



October, 2025 (Revised)                             38
TENNCARE MEDICAID                                                                 CHAPTER 1200-13-13

(Rule 1200-13-13-.04, continued)
SERVICE                  BENEFIT FOR PERSONS                    BENEFIT FOR PERSONS AGED 21
                         UNDER AGE 21                           AND OLDER
                         .01, are presumed to be medically
                         necessary and covered for
                         enrollees under age 2, not to
                         exceed 100 per enrollee per
                         calendar month.

                          Infant Diapers are not covered for
                          enrollees age 2 or older.

                          Infant Diapers are only provided
                          through participating pharmacies
                          contracted with TennCare’s PBM.
                          A current list of the specific
                          brands and quantity limitations
                          covered within this rule shall be
                          made available on the TennCare
                          website at tn.gov/tenncare.

                          Enrollees who qualify to receive
                          Infant Diapers under this benefit
                          cannot submit a Request for
                          Reimbursement (as defined in
                          Rule .01) for amounts paid out of
                          pocket.

                          Diapering and incontinence
                          supplies, which includes but is not
                          limited to disposable wet wipes,
                          diaper creams, baby talcum
                          powder, diaper disposal systems,
                          incontinence liners, underpads,
                          sterile gloves, and non-sterile
                          gloves, are not covered.
13. Inpatient and         Covered as medically necessary.       Covered as medically necessary.
Outpatient Substance
Abuse Benefits [defined                                         Substance abuse benefits delivered in
as services for the                                             IMDs are covered up to 30 days per year.
treatment of substance
abuse that are provided
(a) in an inpatient
hospital (as defined at
42 C.F.R. § 440.10) or
(b) as outpatient
hospital services (see
42 C.F.R. § 440.20(a));
includes services in
IMDs as provided for in
42 U.S.C. § 1396n(l)].
14. Inpatient Hospital    Covered as medically necessary.       Covered as medically necessary.
Services [defined at 42
C.F.R. § 440.10].         Preadmission and concurrent           Preadmission and concurrent reviews
                          reviews allowed.                      allowed.

15. Inpatient             See “Inpatient Hospital Services.”    Not Covered.
Rehabilitation Facility



October, 2025 (Revised)                            39
TENNCARE MEDICAID                                                                    CHAPTER 1200-13-13

(Rule 1200-13-13-.04, continued)
SERVICE                  BENEFIT FOR PERSONS                     BENEFIT FOR PERSONS AGED 21
                         UNDER AGE 21                            AND OLDER
Services.
16. Lab and X-ray        Covered as medically necessary.         Covered as medically necessary.
Services [defined at 42
C.F.R. § 440.30].
17. Medical Supplies     Covered as medically necessary.         Covered as medically necessary.
[defined at 42 C.F.R. §
440.70(b)(3)].
18. Mental Health Crisis Covered as medically necessary.         Covered as medically necessary.
Services [defined as
services rendered to
alleviate a psychiatric
emergency].
19. Methadone Clinic     Covered as medically necessary.         Covered as medically necessary.
Services [defined as
services provided by a
methadone clinic].
20. Non-Emergency        Covered as medically necessary.         Covered as medically necessary.
Ambulance
Transportation, [defined
at 42 C.F.R. §
440.170(a)(1) and (3)].
21. Non-Emergency        Covered as necessary for                Covered as necessary for enrollees
Transportation [defined  enrollees lacking accessible            lacking accessible transportation for
at 42 C.F.R. §           transportation for covered              covered services. Emphasis shall be
440.170(a)(1) and (3)].  services. Emphasis shall be             placed on the utilization of fixed route
                         placed on the utilization of fixed      and/or public transportation where
                         route and/or public transportation      appropriate and available.
                         where appropriate and available.
                                                                 The travel to access primary care and
                          The travel to access primary care      dental services must meet the
                          and dental services must meet          requirements of the TennCare
                          the requirements of the TennCare       demonstration project terms and
                          demonstration project terms and        conditions. The availability of specialty
                          conditions. The availability of        services as related to travel distance
                          specialty services as related to       should meet the usual and customary
                          travel distance should meet the        standards for the community. However, in
                          usual and customary standards          the event the MCC is unable to negotiate
                          for the community. However, in         such an arrangement for an enrollee,
                          the event the MCC is unable to         transportation must be provided
                          negotiate such an arrangement          regardless of whether the enrollee has
                          for an enrollee, transportation        access to transportation.
                          must be provided regardless of
                          whether the enrollee has access        For persons dually eligible for Medicare
                          to transportation.                     and Medicaid, non-emergency
                                                                 transportation to access medical services
                          If the enrollee is a minor child,      covered by Medicare is provided, as long
                          transportation must be provided        as these services would be covered by
                          for the child and an                   TennCare for the enrollee if he did not
                          accompanying adult. However,           have Medicare. The Medicare provider of
                          transportation for a minor child       the medical service does not have to
                          shall not be denied pursuant to        participate in TennCare. Transportation to
                          any policy which poses a blanket       these medical services is covered within
                          restriction due to enrollee’s age or   the same access standards as those
                          lack of parental accompaniment.        applicable for TennCare enrollees who



October, 2025 (Revised)                             40
TENNCARE MEDICAID                                                                  CHAPTER 1200-13-13

(Rule 1200-13-13-.04, continued)
SERVICE                  BENEFIT FOR PERSONS                   BENEFIT FOR PERSONS AGED 21
                         UNDER AGE 21                          AND OLDER
                         Any decision to deny                  are not also Medicare beneficiaries.
                         transportation of a minor child due
                         to an enrollee’s age or lack of       One escort is allowed per enrollee if the
                         parental accompaniment must be        enrollee requires assistance. Assistance
                         made on a case-by-case basis          is defined for purposes of this rule as help
                         and must be based on the              provided to the enrollee that enables the
                         individual facts surrounding the      enrollee to receive a medically necessary
                         request. As with any denial, all      service. Examples of assistance are:
                         notices and actions must be in        physical assistance such as holding doors
                         accordance with the appeals           or pushing wheelchairs; language
                         process.                              assistance such as interpreter services or
                                                               reading for someone who is illiterate; or
                                                               decision making assistance. See Rule
                          Tennessee recognizes the
                                                               1200-13-13-.01 for a definition of who
                          “mature minor exception” to          may be an escort.
                          permission for medical treatment.

                          The provision of transportation to
                          and from covered dental services
                          is the responsibility of the MCO.

                          For persons dually eligible for
                          Medicare and Medicaid, non-
                          emergency transportation to
                          access medical services covered
                          by Medicare is provided, as long
                          as these services would be
                          covered by TennCare for the
                          enrollee if he did not have
                          Medicare. The Medicare provider
                          of the medical services does not
                          have to participate in TennCare.
                          Transportation to these medical
                          services is covered within the
                          same access standards as those
                          applicable for TennCare enrollees
                          who are not also Medicare
                          beneficiaries.

                          One escort is allowed per enrollee
                          if the enrollee requires
                          assistance. Assistance is defined
                          for purposes of this rule as help
                          provided to the enrollee that
                          enables the enrollee to receive a
                          medically necessary service.
                          Examples of assistance are:
                          physical assistance such as
                          holding doors or pushing
                          wheelchairs; language assistance
                          such as interpreter services or
                          reading for someone who is
                          illiterate; or decision making
                          assistance. See Rule 1200-13-
                          13-.01 for a definition of who may
                          be an escort.


October, 2025 (Revised)                            41
TENNCARE MEDICAID                                                                   CHAPTER 1200-13-13

(Rule 1200-13-13-.04, continued)
SERVICE                  BENEFIT FOR PERSONS                    BENEFIT FOR PERSONS AGED 21
                         UNDER AGE 21                           AND OLDER
22. Occupational         Covered as medically necessary,        Covered as medically necessary, by a
Therapy [defined at 42   by a Licensed Occupational             Licensed Occupational Therapist, to
C.F.R. § 440.110(b)].    Therapist, to restore, improve,        restore, improve, or stabilize impaired
                         stabilize or ameliorate impaired       functions.
                         functions.
23. Organ and Tissue     Covered as medically necessary.        Covered as medically necessary when
Transplant Services                                             coverable by Medicare.
and Donor
Organ/Tissue             Experimental or investigational        Experimental or investigational
Procurement Services     transplants are not covered.           transplants are not covered.
[defined as the transfer
of an organ or tissue
from individual to a
TennCare enrollee.

24. Outpatient Hospital   Covered as medically necessary.       Covered as medically necessary.
Services [defined at 42
C.F.R. § 440.20(a)].
25. Outpatient Mental     Covered as medically necessary.       Covered as medically necessary.
Health Services
(including Physician
Services), [defined at
42 C.F.R. § 440.20(a),
42 C.F.R. § 440.50, and
42 C.F.R. § 440.90].
26. Pharmacy Services     Covered as medically necessary.       (A) Covered as medically necessary,
[defined at 42 C.F.R. §   Certain drugs (known as DESI,         subject to the limitations set out below.
440.120(a) and            LTE, IRS drugs) are excluded          Certain drugs (known as DESI, LTE, IRS
obtained directly from    from coverage. Persons dually         drugs) are excluded from coverage.
an ambulatory retail      eligible for Medicaid and             Persons dually eligible for Medicaid and
pharmacy setting,         Medicare will receive their           Medicare will receive their pharmacy
outpatient hospital       pharmacy services through             services through Medicare Part D.
pharmacy, mail order      Medicare Part D.
pharmacy, or those                                              (B) Pharmacy services are the
administered to a long-   Pharmacy services are the             responsibility of the PBM, except for
term care facility        responsibility of the PBM, except     pharmaceuticals supplied and
(nursing facility)        for pharmaceuticals supplied and      administered in a doctor’s office.
resident].                administered in a doctor’s office.
                          For persons who are not dually        (C) Pharmacy services with no quantity
                          eligible for Medicare and             limits on the number of prescriptions per
                          Medicaid, pharmaceuticals             month for the following non-Medicare
                          supplied and administered in a        enrollees only: adults age 21 and older
                          doctor’s office are the               enrolled in CHOICES 1 or CHOICES 2;
                          responsibility of the MCO. For        adults age 21 and older enrolled in ECF
                          persons who are dually eligible for   CHOICES who meet nursing facility level
                          Medicare and Medicaid,                of care or transitioned from a Section
                          pharmaceuticals supplied and          1915(c) waiver into ECF CHOICES and
                          administered in a doctor’s office     granted an exception by TennCare based
                          are the responsibility of the MCO     on ICF/IID level of care; non-Medicare
                          if not covered by Medicare.           PACE enrollees; and persons receiving
                                                                TennCare-reimbursed services in an
                                                                Intermediate Care Facility for Individuals
                                                                with Intellectual Disabilities or a Home
                                                                and Community Based Services Waiver



October, 2025 (Revised)                            42
TENNCARE MEDICAID                                                   CHAPTER 1200-13-13

(Rule 1200-13-13-.04, continued)
SERVICE                  BENEFIT FOR PERSONS   BENEFIT FOR PERSONS AGED 21
                         UNDER AGE 21          AND OLDER
                                               for Individuals with Intellectual Disabilities.

                                               (D) For hospice patients, drugs used for
                                               the relief of pain and symptom control
                                               related to their terminal illness are
                                               covered as part of the hospice benefit. If
                                               the patient is not a Medicare beneficiary,
                                               pharmacy services needed for conditions
                                               unrelated to the terminal illness are
                                               covered by TennCare. There are no
                                               quantity limits on the number of
                                               prescriptions per month covered by
                                               TennCare if the hospice patient is
                                               receiving TennCare-reimbursed room and
                                               board in a Nursing Facility. If the patient
                                               is receiving hospice services at home or
                                               in a residential hospice, coverage of
                                               pharmacy services is as described in
                                               sections (C) and (E).

                                               (E) Subject to (C) and (D) above,
                                               pharmacy services for Medicaid adults
                                               age 21 and older are limited to no more
                                               than two (2) brand name prescriptions
                                               and/or refills per enrollee per month.
                                               Additional brand name drugs for
                                               individuals in (E) shall not be covered
                                               except as specified in (G) and (H) below.
                                               There is no quantity limit on the number of
                                               covered generic drugs.

                                               (F) Prescriptions shall be counted
                                               beginning on the first day of each
                                               calendar month. Each prescription and/or
                                               refill counts as one (1).

                                               (G) TennCare shall maintain an Automatic
                                               Exemption List of medications which shall
                                               not count against such limit. TennCare
                                               may modify the Automatic Exemption List
                                               at its discretion. The most current version
                                               of the Automatic Exemption List will be
                                               made available to enrollees via the
                                               internet on the TennCare website at
                                               www.tn.gov/tenncare and upon request
                                               by calling TennCare Connect at the toll-
                                               free number in the Member Handbook.
                                               The medications that are specified on the
                                               current version of the Automatic
                                               Exemption List on the date of service
                                               shall be considered exempt from
                                               applicable prescription limits.

                                               (H) TennCare may also maintain a


October, 2025 (Revised)                   43
TENNCARE MEDICAID                                                 CHAPTER 1200-13-13

(Rule 1200-13-13-.04, continued)
SERVICE                  BENEFIT FOR PERSONS   BENEFIT FOR PERSONS AGED 21
                         UNDER AGE 21          AND OLDER
                                               Prescriber Attestation List of medications
                                               available when the prescriber attests to
                                               an urgent need. TennCare may include
                                               certain drugs or categories of drugs on
                                               the list, and may maintain, and make
                                               available to physicians, providers,
                                               pharmacists, and the public, a list that
                                               shall indicate the drugs or types of drugs
                                               TennCare has determined to so include.
                                               The Prescriber Attestation List drugs may
                                               be approved for enrollees who have
                                               already met an applicable benefit limit
                                               only if the prescribing professional seeks
                                               and obtains a special exemption. In order
                                               to obtain a special exemption, the
                                               prescribing provider must submit an
                                               attestation as directed by TennCare
                                               regarding the urgent need for the drug.
                                               TennCare will approve the prescribing
                                               provider’s determination that the criteria
                                               for the special exemption are met, without
                                               further review, within 24 hours of receipt.
                                               Enrollees will not be entitled to a hearing
                                               regarding their eligibility for a special
                                               exemption if (i) the prescribing provider
                                               has not submitted the required attestation,
                                               or (ii) the requested drug is not on the
                                               Prescriber Attestation List. At its
                                               discretion, TennCare may combine the
                                               Prescriber Attestation List with the
                                               Automatic Exemption List and thereby
                                               suspend the requirement that prescribing
                                               providers seek a special exemption. In so
                                               doing, TennCare will treat the drugs on
                                               the Prescriber Attestation List as if they
                                               appeared on the Automatic Exemption
                                               List, and thus, those drugs will also be
                                               exempt from the applicable prescription
                                               limits. TennCare must specify on its
                                               website the decision to combine the
                                               Prescriber Attestation List with the
                                               Automatic Exemption List.

                                               (I) Over-the-counter (OTC) drugs for
                                               TennCare adults are not covered even if
                                               the enrollee has a prescription for such
                                               service, unless the drug is listed on the
                                               “Covered OTC Drug List” that is available
                                               on the TennCare website located at
                                               www.tn.gov/tenncare on the date of
                                               service.




October, 2025 (Revised)                   44
TENNCARE MEDICAID                                                                    CHAPTER 1200-13-13

(Rule 1200-13-13-.04, continued)
SERVICE                  BENEFIT FOR PERSONS                     BENEFIT FOR PERSONS AGED 21
                         UNDER AGE 21                            AND OLDER
27. Physical Therapy     Covered as medically necessary,         Covered as medically necessary, by a
[defined at 42 C.F.R. §  by a Licensed Physical Therapist,       Licensed Physical Therapist, to restore,
440.110(a)].             to restore, improve, stabilize or       improve, or stabilize impaired functions.
                         ameliorate impaired functions.
28. Physician Inpatient     Covered as medically necessary.      Covered as medically necessary.
Services [defined at 42
C.F.R. § 440.50].
29. Physician               Covered as medically necessary.      Covered as medically necessary.
Outpatient
Services/Community          Services provided by a Primary       Services provided by a Primary Care
Health Clinics/Other        Care Provider when the enrollee      Provider when the enrollee has a primary
Clinic Services [defined    has a primary behavioral health      behavioral health diagnosis (ICD-9-CM
at 42 C.F.R. §              diagnosis (ICD-9-CM 290.xx-          290.xx-319.xx) are the responsibility of
440.20(b), 42 C.F.R. §      319.xx) are the responsibility of    the MCO.
440.50, and 42 C.F.R. §     the MCO.
440.90].                                                         Medical evaluations provided by a
                            Medical evaluations provided by a    neurologist, as approved by the MCO,
                            neurologist, as approved by the      and/or an emergency room provider to
                            MCO, and/or an emergency room        establish a primary behavioral health
                            provider to establish a primary      diagnosis are the responsibility of the
                            behavioral health diagnosis are      MCO.
                            the responsibility of the MCO.
30. Private Duty            Covered as medically necessary       Covered as medically necessary in
Nursing [defined at 42      in accordance with the definition    accordance with the definition of Private
C.F.R. § 440.80 and at      of Private Duty Nursing at Rule      Duty Nursing at Rule 1200-13-13-.01,
Rule 1200-13-13-.01].       1200-13-13-.01, when prescribed      when prescribed by an attending
                            by an attending physician for        physician for treatment and services
                            treatment and services rendered      rendered by a Registered Nurse (R.N.) or
                            by a Registered Nurse (R.N.) or a    a licensed practical nurse (L.P.N.). Private
                            licensed practical nurse (L.P.N.).   duty nursing services are limited to
                            Prior authorization required, as     services that support the use of ventilator
                            described in Paragraph (6) of this   equipment or other life-sustaining
                            rule.                                technology when constant nursing
                                                                 supervision, visual assessment, and
                                                                 monitoring of both equipment and patient
                                                                 are required. Prior authorization required,
                                                                 as described in Paragraph (6) of this rule.
31. Prosthetic Devices      Covered as medically necessary.      Covered as medically necessary.
[defined at 42 C.F.R. §
440.120(c)].
32. Psychiatric Inpatient   Covered as medically necessary.      Covered as medically necessary.
Facility Services
[defined at 42 C.F.R. §     Preadmission and concurrent          Preadmission and concurrent reviews by
441, Subparts C and D       reviews by the MCC are allowed.      the MCC are allowed.
and including services
for persons of all ages].
33. Psychiatric             See “Pharmacy Services.”             See “Pharmacy Services.”
Pharmacy.

34. Psychiatric             Covered as medically necessary.      Covered as medically necessary.
Rehabilitation Services
[defined as psychiatric
services delivered in
accordance with 42



October, 2025 (Revised)                              45
TENNCARE MEDICAID                                                                    CHAPTER 1200-13-13

(Rule 1200-13-13-.04, continued)
SERVICE                  BENEFIT FOR PERSONS                     BENEFIT FOR PERSONS AGED 21
                         UNDER AGE 21                            AND OLDER
C.F.R. § 440.130(d)].

35. Psychiatric            Covered as medically necessary.       Covered as medically necessary.
Physician Inpatient
Services [defined at 42
C.F.R. § 440.50].
36. Psychiatric            See “Outpatient Mental Health         See “Outpatient Mental Health Services.”
Physician Outpatient       Services.”
Services.
37. Psychiatric            Covered as medically necessary.       Covered as medically necessary.
Residential Treatment
Services [defined at 42
C.F.R. § 483.352] and
including services for
persons of all ages].
38. Reconstructive         Covered in accordance with            Covered in accordance with Tenn. Code
Breast Surgery             Tenn. Code Ann. § 56-7-2507           Ann. § 56-7-2507 which requires
[defined in accordance     which requires coverage of all        coverage of all stages of reconstructive
with Tenn. Code Ann. §     stages of reconstructive breast       breast surgery on a diseased breast as a
56-7-2507].                surgery on a diseased breast as a     result of a mastectomy as well as any
                           result of a mastectomy as well as     surgical procedure on the non-diseased
                           any surgical procedure on the         breast deemed necessary to establish
                           non-diseased breast deemed            symmetry between the two breasts in the
                           necessary to establish symmetry       manner chosen by the physician. The
                           between the two breasts in the        surgical procedure performed on a non-
                           manner chosen by the physician.       diseased breast to establish symmetry
                           The surgical procedure performed      with the diseased breast will only be
                           on a non-diseased breast to           covered if the surgical procedure
                           establish symmetry with the           performed on a non-diseased breast
                           diseased breast will only be          occurs within five (5) years of the date the
                           covered if the surgical procedure     reconstructive breast surgery was
                           performed on a non-diseased           performed on a diseased breast.
                           breast occurs within five (5) years
                           of the date the reconstructive
                           breast surgery was performed on
                           a diseased breast.
39. Rehabilitation         See “Occupational Therapy,” and       See “Occupational Therapy,” “Physical
Services.                  “Physical Therapy,” and “Speech       Therapy,” and “Speech Therapy.”
                           Therapy,” and “Inpatient
                           Rehabilitation Facility Services.”
40. Renal Dialysis         Covered as medically necessary.       Covered as medically necessary.
Clinic Services [defined   Generally limited to the beginning    Generally limited to the beginning ninety
at 42 C.F.R. § 440.90].    ninety (90) day period prior to the   (90) day period prior to the enrollee’s
                           enrollee’s becoming eligible for      becoming eligible for coverage by the
                           coverage by the Medicare              Medicare program.
                           program.
41. Speech Therapy         Covered as medically necessary,       Covered as medically necessary, as long
[defined at 42 C.F.R. §    by a Licensed Speech Therapist        as there is continued medical progress,
440.110(c)].               to restore, improve, stabilize or     by a Licensed Speech Therapist to
                           ameliorate impaired functions.        restore speech after a loss or impairment.

42. Transportation.        See “Emergency Air and Ground         See “Emergency Air and Ground
                           Transportation,” “Non-Emergency       Transportation,” “Non-Emergency
                           Ambulance Transportation,” and        Ambulance Transportation,” and “Non-
                           “Non-Emergency Transportation.”       Emergency Transportation.”
43. Vision Services        Preventive, diagnostic, and           Medical eye care, meaning evaluation



October, 2025 (Revised)                             46
TENNCARE MEDICAID                                                                    CHAPTER 1200-13-13

(Rule 1200-13-13-.04, continued)
SERVICE                  BENEFIT FOR PERSONS                    BENEFIT FOR PERSONS AGED 21
                         UNDER AGE 21                           AND OLDER
[defined as services to  treatment services (including          and management of abnormal conditions,
treat conditions of the  eyeglasses) covered as medically       diseases, and disorders of the eye (not
eyes].                   necessary.                             including evaluation and treatment of the
                                                                refractive state) is covered. Routine,
                                                                periodic assessment, evaluation or
                                                                screening of normal eyes, and
                                                                examinations for the purpose of
                                                                prescribing, fitting, or changing
                                                                eyeglasses and/or contact lenses are not
                                                                covered.

                                                                One pair of cataract glasses or lenses is
                                                                covered for adults following cataract
                                                                surgery.

           (c)   Pharmacy

                 TennCare is permitted under the terms and conditions of the demonstration project
                 approved by the federal government to restrict coverage of prescription and non-
                 prescription drugs to a TennCare-approved list of drugs known as a drug formulary.
                 TennCare must make this list of covered drugs available to the public. Through the use
                 of a formulary, the following drugs or classes of drugs, or their medical uses, shall be
                 excluded from coverage or otherwise restricted by TennCare as described in Section
                 1927 of the Social Security Act [42 U.S.C. § 1396r-8]:

                 1.    Agents for weight loss or weight gain, except for weight loss drugs when
                       prescribed for treatment of obesity.

                 2.    Agents to promote fertility or for the treatment of impotence or infertility or for the
                       reversal of sterilization.

                 3.    Agents for cosmetic purposes or hair growth.

                 4.    Agents for symptomatic relief of coughs and colds.

                 5.    Prescription vitamins and mineral products, except prenatal vitamins and fluoride
                       preparations.

                 6.    Nonprescription drugs.

                 7.    Covered outpatient drugs, which the manufacturer seeks to require as a
                       condition of sale that associated tests or monitoring services be purchased
                       exclusively from the manufacturer or his designee.

                 8.    TennCare shall not cover drugs considered by the FDA to be Less Than Effective
                       (LTE) and DESI drugs, or drugs considered to be Identical, Related and Similar
                       (IRS) to DESI and LTE drugs or any other pharmacy services for which federal
                       financial participation (FFP) is not available. The exclusion of drugs for which no
                       FFP is available extends to all TennCare enrollees regardless of the enrollee’s
                       age. TennCare shall not cover experimental or investigational drugs which have
                       not received final approval from the FDA.

                 9.    Buprenorphine products for opiate addiction treatment for persons aged 21 and
                       older are restricted as follows:



October, 2025 (Revised)                             47
TENNCARE MEDICAID                                                                      CHAPTER 1200-13-13

(Rule 1200-13-13-.04, continued)

                       (i)     Dosage shall not exceed sixteen milligrams (16 mg) per day for a period of
                               up to six (6) months from the initiation of therapy.

                       (ii)    For enrollees who are pregnant while receiving the sixteen milligrams (16
                               mg) per day dosage, the six-month period does not begin until the enrollee
                               is no longer pregnant.

                       (iii)   At the end of the six-month period described in subparts (i) and (ii), the
                               covered dosage amount shall not exceed eight milligrams (8 mg) per day.

                 10.   Sedative hypnotic medications for persons aged 21 and older shall not exceed
                       fourteen (14) pills per month for sedative hypnotic formulations in pill form such
                       as Ambien and Lunesta, one hundred forty milliliters (140 ml) per month of
                       chloral hydrate, or one (1) bottle every sixty (60) days of Zolpimist.

                 11.   Allergy medications.

                 12.   Opioid products for persons aged twenty-one (21) and older are restricted as
                       follows:

                       (i)     “Chronic opioid user” means:

                               (I)    A TennCare enrollee whose TennCare paid claims data
                                      demonstrates that he has received at least a ninety (90) day quantity
                                      of prescribed opioids in the one hundred eighty (180) day period
                                      immediately preceding the opioid’s prescription date.

                               (II)   For a TennCare enrollee who has not been enrolled in TennCare
                                      long enough to demonstrate that he is a chronic opioid user as
                                      defined in Item (I), the enrollee may demonstrate that he has
                                      received at least a ninety (90) day quantity of prescribed opioids in
                                      the one hundred eighty (180) day period immediately preceding the
                                      opioid’s prescription date by supplying paid claims data and medical
                                      records from his previous healthcare provider(s) or health insurer(s).

                       (ii)    “Non-chronic opioid user” means a TennCare enrollee whose TennCare
                               paid claims data demonstrates he has received less than a ninety (90) day
                               quantity of prescribed opioids in the one hundred eighty (180) day period
                               immediately preceding the opioid’s prescription date.

                       (iii)   Non-chronic opioid users shall be eligible to receive covered prescription
                               opioid products as follows:

                               (I)    A maximum of fifteen (15) dosage days in any six (6) month period;
                                      and

                               (II)   Daily dosage shall not exceed sixty (60) morphine milligram
                                      equivalents (MME) per day.

                       (iv)    The restrictions in Subpart (iii) do not apply for enrollees:

                               (I)    With severe cancer pain undergoing active or palliative cancer
                                      treatment;




October, 2025 (Revised)                              48
TENNCARE MEDICAID                                                                       CHAPTER 1200-13-13

(Rule 1200-13-13-.04, continued)
                             (II)       With sickle cell disease or these related disorders: sickle cell anemia,
                                        sickle hemoglobin-C disease, sickle beta-plus thalassemia, sickle
                                        beta zero thalassemia, hemoglobin SD (HbSD), hemoglobin SE
                                        (HbSE), or hemoglobin SO (HbSo);

                                (III)   Who are severe burn victims; or

                                (IV)    Who are receiving hospice or palliative care.

                        (v)     Notwithstanding the restrictions in Subpart (iii), enrollees residing in a
                                Medicaid-certified Nursing Facility may receive up to forty-five (45) days of
                                sixty (60) MME per day in any ninety (90) day period.

                        (vi)    Opioid prescriptions are subject to prior authorization following the first fill
                                of a new opioid prescription.

                        (vii)   For women of child-bearing age (between the ages of fifteen (15) and forty-
                                four (44)) and ability, when prior authorization is required for an opioid
                                prescription, the prescribing provider must submit information to the
                                enrollee’s PBM regarding the enrollee’s pregnancy status and use of
                                contraception or family planning methods, and the provision of counseling
                                regarding the risks of becoming pregnant while receiving opioid
                                medication. The information regarding pregnancy status and contraceptive
                                use may, when appropriate, be based on self-reporting by the patient.

            (d)   The MCC shall be allowed to provide cost effective alternative services as defined in
                  paragraph 1200-13-13-.01(30). Cost effective alternative services are not reimbursable
                  in any circumstances other than those described in that paragraph.

            (e)   Remote ultrasound procedures and remote fetal nonstress tests are covered as
                  medically necessary and as follows:

                  1.    A remote fetal ultrasound procedure or remote fetal nonstress test is
                        reimbursable when the provider uses digital technology:

                        (i)     To collect medical and other forms of health data from a patient and
                                electronically transmit that information securely to a healthcare provider
                                who is in a separate location for the purpose of interpretation and making
                                recommendations;

                        (ii)    That is compliant with the federal Health Insurance Portability and
                                Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA)(42 U.S.C. § 1320d et seq.); and

                        (iii)   That is approved by the federal food and drug administration.

                  2.    A fetal nonstress test is only reimbursable with a place of service modifier for at-
                        home monitoring with remote monitoring solutions that are cleared by the federal
                        food and drug administration for on-label use for monitoring fetal heart rate,
                        maternal heart rate, and uterine activity.

      (2)   Use of Cost Effective Alternative Services.

            (a)   MCCs shall be allowed, but are not required, to use cost effective alternative services if
                  and only if:

                  1.    These services are listed in the MCC contract and/or in Policy BEN 08-001; or



October, 2025 (Revised)                                49
TENNCARE MEDICAID                                                                  CHAPTER 1200-13-13

(Rule 1200-13-13-.04, continued)

                 2.    These services are provided under the CHOICES program for individuals
                       enrolled in the CHOICES program in accordance with Rule 1200-13-01-.05 or
                       the ECF CHOICES program for individuals enrolled in the ECF CHOICES
                       program in accordance with Rule 1200-13-01-.31; and

                 3.    They are medically appropriate and cost effective.

           (b)   Use of approved cost effective alternative services is made at the sole discretion of the
                 MCC.

     (3)   Emergency Medical Services.

           Emergency Medical Services shall be available twenty-four (24) hours per day, seven (7)
           days per week. Coverage of emergency medical services shall not be subject to prior
           authorization by the managed care organization but may include a requirement that notice be
           given to the MCC of use of out-of-plan emergency services. However, such notice
           requirements shall provide at least a 24-hour time frame after the emergency for notice to be
           given to the MCC.

     (4)   Hospital Discharges.

           Hospital discharges of mothers and newborn babies following delivery shall take into
           consideration the following guidelines:

           (a)   The decision to discharge postpartum mothers and newborns less than 24-48 hours
                 after delivery should be made based upon discharge criteria collaboratively developed
                 and adopted by obstetricians, pediatricians, family practitioners, delivery hospitals, and
                 health plans. The criteria must be contingent upon appropriate preparation, meeting in
                 hospital criteria for both mother and baby, and the planning and implementation of
                 appropriate follow-up. An individualized plan of care must include identification of a
                 primary care provider for both mother and baby and arrangements for follow-up
                 evaluation of the newborn.

                 Length of hospital stay is only one factor to consider when attempting to optimize
                 patient outcomes for postpartum women and newborns. Excellent outcomes are
                 possible even when length of stay is very brief (less than 24 hours) if perinatal health
                 care is well planned, allows for continuity of care, and patients are well chosen. Some
                 postpartum patients and/or newborns may require extended hospitalization (greater
                 than 48-72 hours) despite meticulous care due to medical, obstetric, or neonatal
                 complications. The decision for time of discharge must be individualized and made by
                 the physicians caring for the mother-baby pair. The following guidelines have been
                 developed to aid in the identification of postpartum mothers and newborns who may be
                 candidates for discharge prior to 24-48 hours. The guidelines also provide examples
                 where discharge is inappropriate.

                 Principles of patient care should be based upon data obtained by clinical research.
                 Regarding the question of postpartum and newborn length of hospitalization, there are
                 inadequate studies available to provide clear direction for clinical decision-making.
                 Clinical guidelines represent an attempt to conceptualize what is, in reality, a dynamic
                 process of health care refinement. Review of these guidelines is desirable and
                 expected.

                 No provider shall be denied participation, reimbursement or reduction in reimbursement
                 within a network solely related to his/her compliance with the “Guidelines for Discharge
                 of Postpartum Mothers and Newborns.”



October, 2025 (Revised)                            50
TENNCARE MEDICAID                                                                    CHAPTER 1200-13-13

(Rule 1200-13-13-.04, continued)

           (b)   Guidelines for Discharge of Postpartum Mothers and Newborns.

                 1.    Discharge Planning.

                       (i)    Discharge planning should occur in a planned and systematic fashion for
                              all postpartum women and newborns in order to enhance care, prevent
                              complications and minimize the need for rehospitalization. Prior to
                              discharge a discussion should be held between the physician or another
                              health care provider and the mother (and father if possible) about any
                              expected perinatal problems and ways to cope with them. Plans for future
                              and immediate care as well as instructions to follow in the event of an
                              emergency or complication should be discussed.

                       (ii)   Follow-up care must be planned for both mother and baby at the time of
                              discharge. For patients leaving the hospital prior to 24-48 hours, contact
                              within 48-72 hours of discharge is recommended and may include
                              appropriate follow-up within 48-72 hours as deemed necessary by the
                              attending provider, depending upon individual patient need. This follow-up
                              visit will be acknowledged as a provider encounter.

                              (I)   Maternal Considerations:

                                    I.    Prior to discharge, the patient should be informed of normal
                                          postpartum events including but not limited to:

                                          A.   Lochial patterns;

                                          B.   Range of activity and exercise;

                                          C.   Breast care;

                                          D.   Bladder care;

                                          E.   Dietary needs;

                                          F.   Perineal care;

                                          G.   Emotional responses;

                                          H.   What to report to physician or other health care provider
                                               including:

                                               (A)     Elevation of temperature,

                                               (B)     Chills,

                                               (C)     Leg pains, and

                                               (D)     Increased vaginal bleeding.

                                          I.   Method of contraception;

                                          J.   Coitus resumption; and




October, 2025 (Revised)                           51
TENNCARE MEDICAID                                                                     CHAPTER 1200-13-13

(Rule 1200-13-13-.04, continued)
                                            K.    Specific instructions     for   follow-up    (routine   and
                                                  emergent).

                              (II)    Neonatal Considerations:

                                      I.    Prior to discharge, the following points should be reviewed with
                                            the mother or, preferably, with both parents:

                                            A.    Condition of the neonate;

                                            B.    Immediate needs of the neonate, (e.g., feeding methods
                                                  and environmental supports);

                                            C.    Instructions to follow in the event of a newborn
                                                  complication or emergency;

                                            D.    Feeding techniques;

                                            E.    Skin care, including cord care and genital care;

                                            F.    Temperature assessment and measurement with the
                                                  thermometer; and

                                            G.    Assessment of neonatal well-being;

                                            H.    Recognition of illness including jaundice;

                                            I.    Proper infant safety including use of car seat and
                                                  sleeping position;

                                            J.    Reasonable expectations for the future; and

                                            K.    Importance of maintaining immunization begun with
                                                  initial dose of hepatitis B vaccine.

                 2.    Criteria for Maternal Discharge Less Than 24-48 Hours Following Delivery.

                       (i)    Prior to discharge of the mother, the following should occur:

                              (I)     The mother should have been observed after delivery for a sufficient
                                      time to ensure that her condition is stable, that she has sufficiently
                                      recovered and may be safely transferred to outpatient care.

                              (II)    Laboratory evaluations should be obtained and include ABO blood
                                      group and Rh typing with appropriate use of Rh immune globulin;
                                      and hematocrit or hemoglobin.

                              (III)   The mother should have received adequate preparation for and be
                                      able to assume self and immediate neonatal care.

                       (ii)   Factors which may exclude maternal discharge prior to 24-48 hours
                              include:

                              (I)     Abnormal bleeding.

                              (II)    Fever equal to or greater than 100.4 degrees.



October, 2025 (Revised)                              52
TENNCARE MEDICAID                                                                  CHAPTER 1200-13-13

(Rule 1200-13-13-.04, continued)

                             (III)   Inadequate or no prenatal care.

                             (IV)    Cesarean section.

                             (V)     Untreated or unstable maternal medical condition.

                             (VI)    Uncontrolled hypertension.

                             (VII) Inability to void.

                             (VIII) Inability to tolerate solid foods.

                             (IX)    Adolescent mother without adequate support and where appropriate
                                     follow-up has not been established. A nurse home visit within 24-48
                                     hours of discharge would act as appropriate follow-up.

                             (X)     All efforts should be made to keep mother and infant together to
                                     ensure simultaneous discharge.

                             (XI)    Psychosocial problems (maternal or family) which have been
                                     identified prenatally or in hospital. Where appropriate follow-up has
                                     not been established, a nurse home visit within 24-48 hours of
                                     discharge would act as appropriate follow-up.

                 3.    Criteria for Neonatal Discharge Less than 24-48 Hours Following Delivery.

                       The nursery stay is planned to allow the identification of early problems and to
                       reinforce instruction in preparation for care of the infant at home. Complications
                       often are not predictable by prenatal and intrapartum events. Because many
                       neonatal problems do not become apparent until several days after birth there is
                       an element of medical risk in early neonatal discharge. Most problems are
                       manifest during the first 12 hours, and discharge at or prior to 24 hours is
                       appropriate for many newborns.

                       (i)   Prior to discharge of the newborn at 24-48 hours, the following should have
                             occurred:

                             (I)     The course of antepartum, intrapartum, and postpartum care for both
                                     mother and fetus should be without problems, which may lead to
                                     newborn complications.

                             (II)    The baby is a single birth at 37 to 42 weeks’ gestation and the birth
                                     weight is appropriate for gestational age according to appropriate
                                     intrauterine growth curves.

                             (III)   The baby’s vital signs are documented as being normal and stable
                                     for the 12 hours preceding discharge, including a respiratory rate
                                     below 60/minute, a heart rate of 100 to 160 beats per minute, and an
                                     axillary temperature of 36.1 degrees C in an open crib with
                                     appropriate clothing.

                             (IV)    The baby has urinated and passed at least one stool.

                             (V)     No evidence of excessive bleeding after circumcision greater than 2
                                     hours.



October, 2025 (Revised)                             53
TENNCARE MEDICAID                                                                       CHAPTER 1200-13-13

(Rule 1200-13-13-.04, continued)

                               (VI)    The baby has completed at least two successful feedings, with
                                       documentation that the baby is able to coordinate sucking,
                                       swallowing, and breathing while feeding.

                               (VII) No evidence of significant jaundice in the first 24 hours of life.

                               (VIII) The parent’s or caretaker’s knowledge, ability, and confidence to
                                      provide adequate care for her baby are documented.

                               (IX)    Laboratory data are available and reviewed including:

                                       I.     Maternal syphilis and hepatitis B surface antigen status.

                                       II.    Cord or infant blood type and direct Coomb’s test result as
                                              clinically indicated.

                               (X)     Screening tests are performed in accordance with state regulations.
                                       If the test is performed before 24 hours of milk feeding, a system for
                                       repeating the test must be assured during the follow-up visit.

                               (XI)    Initial hepatitis B vaccine is administered or a scheduled appointment
                                       for its administration has been made.

                               (XII) A physician-directed source of continuing medical care for both the
                                     mother and the baby is identified. For newborns discharged less
                                     than 24-48 hours after delivery, a definitive plan for contact within
                                     48-72 hours after discharge has been made. A nurse home visit
                                     within 24-48 hours would be considered appropriate follow-up.

                       (ii)    Maternal factors which may exclude discharge of the newborn prior to 24-
                               48 hours include:

                               (I)     Inadequate or no prenatal care,

                               (II)    Medical conditions that pose a significant risk to the infant,

                               (III)   Group B streptococcus colonization,

                               (IV)    Untreated syphilis,

                               (V)     Suspected active genital herpes,

                               (VI)    HIV,

                               (VII) Adolescent without adequate support and where appropriate follow-
                                     up has not been established (a nurse home visit within 24-48 hours
                                     of discharge will act as appropriate follow-up),

                               (VIII) Mental retardation or psychiatric illness, and

                               (IX)    Requirements for continued maternal hospitalization.

                       (iii)   Newborn factors which may exclude discharge of the newborn prior to 24-
                               48 hours include:




October, 2025 (Revised)                                54
TENNCARE MEDICAID                                                                  CHAPTER 1200-13-13

(Rule 1200-13-13-.04, continued)
                             (I)       Preterm gestation (less than 37 weeks);

                               (II)    Small for gestational age;

                               (III)   Large for gestational age;

                               (IV)    Abnormal physical exam, vital signs, colors, activity, feeding or
                                       stooling;

                               (V)     Significant congenital malformations; and

                               (VI)    Abnormal laboratory finding:

                                       I.     Hypoglycemia,

                                       II.    Hyperbilirubinemia,

                                       III.   Polycythemia,

                                       IV.    Anemia, and

                                       V.     Rapid plasma reagin positive.

     (5)   Early and Periodic Screening, Diagnostic and Treatment (EPSDT) Services for TennCare
           Medicaid Enrollees under the Age of Twenty-One (21).

           The Bureau of TennCare, through its contracts with Managed Care Organizations (MCOs)
           and other contractors (also referred to collectively as Contractors), operates an EPSDT
           program to provide health care services as required by 42 C.F.R. Part 441, Subpart B and
           the “Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1989” to TennCare Medicaid-eligible enrollees
           under the age of twenty-one (21).

           (a)   Responsibilities of the Bureau of TennCare.

                 1.    The Bureau will:

                       (i)     Keep Contractors informed as to changes to the requirements for the
                               operation of the EPSDT program;

                       (ii)    Make changes to TennCare policy when necessary to keep the EPSDT
                               program in compliance with federal and state requirements;

                       (iii)   Provide policy clarification when needed; and

                       (iv)    Oversee the activities of the Contractors to assure compliance with all
                               aspects of the EPSDT program.

                 2.    The Bureau, through local health departments, shall provide information on
                       covered services to adolescent prenatal patients who enter TennCare Medicaid
                       through presumptive eligibility. Assistance will be offered to presumptive eligibles
                       on the day eligibility is determined in making a timely first prenatal appointment.
                       For a woman past her first trimester, this appointment should occur within fifteen
                       (15) days.

                 3.    The Bureau, through the Department of Children’s Services, shall inform foster
                       parents and institutions or other residential treatment settings with a number of



October, 2025 (Revised)                               55
TENNCARE MEDICAID                                                                     CHAPTER 1200-13-13

(Rule 1200-13-13-.04, continued)
                        eligible children, annually or more often when the need arises, including when a
                        change of administrators, social workers, or foster parents occur, of the
                        availability of EPSDT services.

           (b)    Responsibilities of Contractors.

                  1.    Contractors shall aggressively and effectively inform TennCare Medicaid
                        enrollees of the existence of the EPSDT program, including the availability of
                        specific EPSDT screening and treatment services. Such informing shall occur in
                        a timely manner, generally within sixty (60) days of the MCC’s receipt of
                        notification of the child’s enrollment in its plan and if no one eligible in the family
                        has utilized EPSDT services, at least annually thereafter.

                        Contractors shall document to the Bureau the contractor’s outreach activities and
                        what efforts were made to inform TennCare Medicaid enrollees and/or the
                        enrollee’s responsible party about the availability of EPSDT services and how to
                        access such services. All children, particularly those who have not received
                        complete screenings timely, shall be the target of outreach efforts by the MCOs
                        which are reasonably calculated to insure the child’s participation in EPSDT.
                        Failure to timely submit the requested data may result in liquidated damages as
                        described in the contracts between the Bureau of TennCare and the Contractors.

                  2.    Contractors shall use clear and non-technical terms to provide a combination of
                        written and oral information so that the program is clearly and easily
                        understandable.

                  3.    Contractors shall use effective methods (developed through collaboration with
                        agencies which have established procedures for working with such individuals) to
                        inform TennCare Medicaid individuals who are illiterate, blind, deaf, or cannot
                        understand English, about the availability of EPSDT services.

                  4.    Contractors shall design and conduct outreach to inform all TennCare Medicaid-
                        eligible individuals about what services are available under EPSDT, the benefits
                        of preventive health care, where services are available, and how to obtain them;
                        and that necessary transportation and scheduling assistance is available.

                  5.    Contractors shall create a system so that TennCare Medicaid families can readily
                        access an accurate list of names and phone numbers of contract providers who
                        are currently accepting TennCare.

                  6.    Contractors shall make known and offer to a TennCare Medicaid-covered child
                        and the child’s responsible party of the availability for both transportation and
                        scheduling assistance prior to the due date of the TennCare Medicaid child’s
                        periodic examination.

                  7.    Contractors shall provide TennCare Medicaid enrollees assistance in scheduling
                        appointments, and obtaining transportation prior to the date of each periodic
                        examination as requested and necessary.

                  8.    Contractors shall document services declined by a parent or guardian of a
                        TennCare Medicaid-eligible child or a mature competent child, specifying the
                        particular service declined so that outreach and education for other EPSDT
                        services continues.

                  9.    Contractors shall maintain records of the efforts taken to outreach TennCare
                        Medicaid children who have missed screening appointments when scheduled or



October, 2025 (Revised)                              56
TENNCARE MEDICAID                                                                CHAPTER 1200-13-13

(Rule 1200-13-13-.04, continued)
                        who have failed to schedule regular check-ups. These records shall be made
                        available to the Bureau and other parties as directed.

                 10.   Contractors shall treat a TennCare Medicaid-eligible woman’s request for EPSDT
                       services during pregnancy as a request for EPSDT services for the child at birth.
                       If the pregnant woman is under age twenty-one (21), she may request EPSDT
                       services for herself.

           (c)   Compliance.

                 Contractors must document and maintain records of all outreach efforts made to inform
                 TennCare Medicaid enrollees about the availability of EPSDT services.

     (6)   Prior Authorization for Home Health Nurse, Home Health Aide, and Private Duty Nursing
           Services. Prior authorization by the MCC must be obtained in order to establish the medical
           necessity of all requested home health nurse, home health aide, and private duty nursing
           services.

           (a)   The following information must be provided when seeking prior authorization for home
                 health nurse, home health aide, and private duty nursing services:

                 1.    Name of physician prescribing the service(s);

                 2.    Specific information regarding the patient’s medical condition and any associated
                       disability that creates the need for the requested service(s); and

                 3.    Specific information regarding the service(s) the nurse or aide is expected to
                       perform, including the frequency with which each service must be performed
                       (e.g., tube feeding patient 7:00 a.m., 12:00 p.m., and 5:00 p.m. daily; bathe
                       patient once per day; administer medications three (3) times per day; catheterize
                       patient as needed from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. Monday through Friday; change
                       dressing on wound three (3) times per week). Such information should also
                       include the total period of time that the services are anticipated to be medically
                       necessary by the treating physician (e.g., total number of weeks or months).

           (b)   Home health nurses and aides and private duty nurses will never be authorized to
                 personally transport a TennCare enrollee. Home health nurses and aides delivering
                 prior approved home health care services may accompany an enrollee outside the
                 home in accordance with T.C.A. § 71-5-107(a)(12).

           (c)   Private duty nursing services are limited to services provided in the recipient’s own
                 home, with the following two exceptions:

                 1.    A recipient age twenty-one (21) or older who requires eight (8) or more hours of
                       skilled nursing care in a 24-hour period and is authorized to receive private duty
                       nursing services in the home setting may make use of the approved hours
                       outside of that setting in order for the nurse to accompany the recipient to:

                       (i)     Outpatient health care services (including services delivered through a
                               TennCare home and community based services waiver program);

                       (ii)    Public or private secondary school or credit classes at an accredited
                               vocational or technical school or institute of higher education; or,

                       (iii)   Work at his place of employment.




October, 2025 (Revised)                            57
TENNCARE MEDICAID                                                                       CHAPTER 1200-13-13

(Rule 1200-13-13-.04, continued)
                 2.    A recipient under the age of twenty-one (21) who requires eight (8) or more hours
                        of continuous skilled nursing care in a 24-hour period and is authorized to
                        receive those services in the home setting may make use of the approved hours
                        outside of that setting when normal life activities temporarily take him outside of
                        that setting. Normal life activity for a child under the age of twenty-one (21)
                        means routine work (including work in supported or sheltered work settings);
                        licensed child care; school and school-related activities; religious services and
                        related activities; and outpatient health care services (including services
                        delivered through a TennCare home and community based services waiver
                        program). Normal life activities do not include non-routine or extended home
                        absences.

            (d)   A private duty nurse may accompany a recipient in the circumstances outlined in
                  subparagraph (c) immediately above, but may not drive.

            (e)   Private duty nursing services will only be authorized when there are competent family
                  members or caregivers as indicated below:

                  1.    Private duty nursing services include services to teach and train the recipient and
                        the recipient’s family or other caregivers how to manage the treatment regimen.
                        Having a caregiver willing to learn the tasks necessary to provide a safe
                        environment and quality in home care is essential to assuring the recipient is
                        properly attended to when a nurse or other paid caregiver is not present,
                        including those times when the recipient chooses to attend community activities
                        to which these rules do not specifically permit the private duty nurse or other paid
                        caregiver to accompany the patient.

                  2.    To ensure the health, safety, and welfare of the individual, in order to receive
                        private duty nursing services, the recipient must have family or caregivers who:

                        (i)     Have a demonstrated understanding, ability, and commitment in the care
                                of the individual related to ventilator management, support of other life-
                                sustaining technology, medication administration and feeding, or in the
                                case of children, other medically necessary skilled nursing functions, as
                                applicable; and

                        (ii)    Are trained and willing to meet the recipient’s nursing needs during the
                                hours when paid nursing care is not provided, and to provide backup in the
                                event of an emergency; and

                        (iii)   Are willing and available as needed to meet the recipient’s non-nursing
                                support needs.

                        (iv)    In the case of children under the age of 18, the parent or guardian will be
                                expected to fill this role. In the case of an adult age 18 and older, if the
                                health, safety, and welfare of the individual cannot be assured because the
                                recipient does not have such family or caregiver, private duty nursing
                                services may be denied, subject to items (I) and (II) below. However, it
                                shall be the responsibility of the MCO to:

                                (I)    Arrange for the appropriate level of care, which may include nursing
                                       facility care, if applicable; and

                                (II)   In the case of a person currently receiving private duty nursing
                                       services, facilitate transition to such appropriate level of care prior to
                                       termination of the private duty nursing service.



October, 2025 (Revised)                                58
TENNCARE MEDICAID                                                                   CHAPTER 1200-13-13

(Rule 1200-13-13-.04, continued)

            (f)   Nursing services (provided as part of home health services or by a private duty nurse)
                  will be approved only if the requested service(s) is of the type that must be provided by
                  a nurse as opposed to an aide, except that the MCO may elect to have a nurse perform
                  home health aide services in addition to nursing services if the MCO determines that
                  this is a less costly alternative than providing the services of both a nurse and an aide.
                  Examples of appropriate nursing services include, but are not limited to, management
                  of ventilator equipment or other life-sustaining medical technology, medication
                  management, and tube feedings.

            (g)   Home health aide services will only be approved if the requested service(s) meet all
                  medical necessity requirements including the requirements of 1200-13-16-.05(4)(d).
                  Thus, home health aide services will not be approved to provide child care services,
                  prepare meals, perform housework, or generally supervise patients. Examples of
                  appropriate home health aide services include, but are not limited to, patient transfers
                  and bathing.

Authority: T.C.A. §§ 4-3-1013, 4-5-202, 4-5-203, 4-5-208, 4-5-209, 71-5-102, 71-5-105, 71-5-107, 71-5-
109, 71-5-134, 71-5-146, 71-5-168, 71-5-197, 71-5-198, and 71-5-1404; Executive Order No. 23; Public
Chapter 473, Acts of 2011; and 2025 Public Chapter No. 530. Administrative History: Public necessity
rule filed July 1, 2002; effective through December 13, 2002. Original rule filed September 30, 2002; to be
effective December 14, 2002; however, on December 9, 2002, the House Government Operations
Committee of the General Assembly stayed Rule 1200-13-13-.04; new effective date February 12, 2003.
Emergency rule filed December 13, 2002; effective through May 27, 2003. Public necessity rule filed July
1, 2005; effective through December 13, 2005. Public necessity rule filed September 7, 2005; effective
through February 19, 2006. Amendments filed September 29, 2005; effective December 13, 2005. Public
necessity rule filed December 29, 2005; expired June 12, 2006. On June 13, 2006, affected rules reverted
to status on December 28, 2005. Public necessity rule filed March 13, 2006; effective through August 25,
2006. Public necessity rules filed May 3, 2006; effective through October 15, 2006. Amendments filed
March 31, 2006; effective June 14, 2006. Amendment filed June 12, 2006; effective August 26, 2006.
Amendment filed July 28, 2006; effective October 11, 2006. Public necessity rule filed December 1, 2006;
expires May 5, 2007. Public necessity rule filed January 26, 2007; expires July 10, 2007. Public necessity
rule filed February 2, 2007; effective through July 16, 2007. Amendment filed February 2, 2007; effective
April 18, 2007. Amendment filed April 25, 2007; effective July 9, 2007. Amendments filed May 2, 2007;
effective July 16, 2007. Public necessity rule filed October 11, 2007; effective through March 24, 2008.
Amendment filed January 8, 2008; effective March 23, 2008. Public necessity rule filed September 8,
2008; effective through February 20, 2009. Amendment filed August 19, 2008; effective November 2,
2008. Amendment filed December 5, 2008; effective February 18, 2009. Public necessity rule filed July 1,
2009; effective through December 13, 2009. Amendment filed June 11, 2009; effective August 25, 2009.
Amendment filed September 11, 2009; effective December 10, 2009. Amendments filed September 25,
2009; effective December 24, 2009. Amendments filed September 30, 2009; effective December 29,
2009. Emergency rule filed March 1, 2010; effective through August 28, 2010. Amendments filed May 27,
2010; effective August 25, 2010. Amendment filed October 26, 2010; effective January 24, 2011.
Emergency rules filed July 1, 2011; effective through December 28, 2011. Emergency rule filed August 2,
2011; effective through January 29, 2012. Amendments filed September 23, 2011; effective December
22, 2011. Amendment filed October 28, 2011; effective January 26, 2012. Amendment filed August 10,
2011; effective January 29, 2012. Amendment filed April 25, 2012; effective September 28, 2012.
Emergency rule filed September 27, 2013; effective through March 26, 2014. Amendments filed July 1,
2013; effective September 29, 2013. Amendment filed August 7, 2013; effective November 5, 2013.
Amendment filed September 27, 2013; effective December 26, 2013. Amendment filed December 17,
2013; effective March 17, 2014. Emergency rule filed September 30, 2015; effective through March 28,
2016. Amendments filed December 29, 2015; effective March 28, 2016. Emergency rules filed June 24,
2016; effective through December 21, 2016. Emergency rules filed July 1, 2016; effective through
December 28, 2016. Amendments filed September 13, 2016; effective December 12, 2016. Amendments
filed September 30, 2016; effective December 29, 2016. Emergency rules filed January 16, 2018;
effective through July 15, 2018. Amendments filed April 9, 2018; effective July 8, 2018. Amendments filed



October, 2025 (Revised)                             59
TENNCARE MEDICAID                                                                 CHAPTER 1200-13-13

(Rule 1200-13-13-.04, continued)
January 3, 2019; effective April 3, 2019. Amendments filed July 8, 2021; effective October 6, 2021.
Amendments filed October 26, 2021; effective January 24, 2022. Amendments filed February 16, 2022;
effective May 17, 2022. Emergency rules filed December 27, 2022 to become effective January 1, 2023;
effective through June 30, 2023. Amendments filed January 19, 2023; effective April 19, 2023.
Emergency rules filed August 7, 2024; effective through February 3, 2025. Amendments filed September
11, 2024; effective December 10, 2024. Emergency rules filed December 30, 2024; effective through
June 28, 2025. Amendments filed November 4, 2024; effective February 2, 2025. Amendments filed
March 28, 2025; effective June 26, 2025. Emergency rules filed August 1, 2025; effective through
January 28, 2026. Amendments filed July 7, 2025; effective October 5, 2025.

1200-13-13-.05    ENROLLEE COST SHARING.

      (1)   TennCare Medicaid enrollees do not have cost sharing responsibilities for TennCare
            coverage and covered services, except TennCare Medicaid adults (age 21 and older) who
            receive pharmacy services have nominal copays for the pharmacy services. The copays are
            $3.00 (three dollars) for each covered branded drug and $1.50 (one dollar and fifty cents) for
            each covered generic drug. Branded drugs which exceed the limit of two (2) prescriptions or
            refills per enrollee per month are not covered. Family planning drugs and emergency
            services are exempt from copay. Enrollees may not be denied a service for inability to pay a
            copay. There is no Out-of-Pocket Maximum on copays.

      (2)   The following adult groups are exempt from copay:

            (a)   Individuals receiving hospice services who provide verbal notification of such to the
                  pharmacy provider at the point of service;

            (b)   Individuals who are pregnant who provide verbal notification of such to the pharmacy
                  provider at the point of service; and

            (c)   Individuals who are receiving services in a Nursing Facility, an Intermediate Care
                  Facility for Individuals with Intellectual Disabilities, CHOICES Group 2, or a Home and
                  Community Based Services waiver for individuals with intellectual disabilities.

            (d)   Adults age 21 and older enrolled in ECF CHOICES who meet nursing facility level of
                  care or transitioned from a Section 1915(c) waiver into ECF CHOICES and granted an
                  exception by TennCare based on ICF/IID level of care.

Authority: T.C.A. §§ 4-5-202, 4-5-208, 4-5-209, 71-5-102, 71-5-105, 71-5-107, 71-5-109, and 71-5-134;
Acts of 2003, Public Chapter 412, §1(c); Executive Order No. 23; and 2025 Public Chapter No. 530.
Administrative History: Public necessity rule filed July 1, 2002; effective through December 13, 2002.
Original rule filed September 30, 2002; to be effective December 14, 2002; however, on December 9,
2002, the House Government Operations Committee of the General Assembly stayed Rule 1200-13-13-
.05; new effective date February 12, 2003. Emergency rule filed December 13, 2002; effective through
May 27, 2003. Amendment by Acts of 2003, Public Chapter 412, §1(c) filed and effective June 25, 2003.
Public necessity rule filed July 1, 2005; effective through December 13, 2005. Amendment filed
September 26, 2005; effective December 10, 2005. Emergency rule filed March 1, 2010; effective through
August 28, 2010. Amendment filed May 27, 2010; effective August 25, 2010. Emergency rule filed
September 26, 2013; effective through March 25, 2014. Amendment filed December 17, 2013; effective
March 17, 2014. Emergency rules filed July 1, 2016; effective through December 28, 2016. Amendments
filed September 30, 2016; effective December 29, 2016. Emergency rules filed August 1, 2025; effective
through January 28, 2026.

1200-13-13-.06    MANAGED CARE ORGANIZATIONS.

Managed Care Organizations participating in TennCare will be limited to Health Maintenance
Organizations that are appropriately licensed to operate within the state of Tennessee to provide medical,



October, 2025 (Revised)                            60
TENNCARE MEDICAID                                                                  CHAPTER 1200-13-13

(Rule 1200-13-13-.06, continued)
behavioral, and long-term care services in the TennCare program. Managed Care Organizations shall
have a fully executed contract with the Tennessee Department of Finance and Administration. MCOs,
DBMs and PBMs shall agree to comply with all applicable rules, policies, and contract requirements as
specified by the Tennessee Department of Finance and Administration as applicable. Managed Care
Organizations must continually demonstrate a sufficient provider network based on the standards set by
the Bureau of TennCare to remain in the program and must reasonably meet all quality of care
requirements established by the Bureau of TennCare.

Authority: T.C.A. §§ 4-5-202, 4-5-208, 71-5-105, and 71-5-109 and Executive Order No. 23.
Administrative History: Public necessity rule filed July 1, 2002; effective through December 13, 2002.
Original rule filed September 30, 2002; to be effective December 14, 2002; however, on December 9,
2002, the House Government Operations Committee of the General Assembly stayed Rule 1200-13-13-
.06; new effective date February 12, 2003. Emergency rule filed December 13, 2002; effective through
May 27, 2003. Amendment filed September 25, 2009; effective December 24, 2009. Emergency rule filed
March 1, 2010; effective through August 28, 2010. Amendment filed May 27, 2010; effective August 25,
2010.

1200-13-13-.07    MANAGED CARE ORGANIZATION PAYMENT.

Managed care organizations will be paid pursuant to the contract the MCO has fully executed with the
Tennessee Department of Finance and Administration.

Authority: T.C.A. §§ 4-5-202, 71-5-105, and 71-5-109 and Executive Order No. 23. Administrative
History: Public necessity rule filed July 1, 2002; effective through December 13, 2002. Original rule filed
September 30, 2002; to be effective December 14, 2002; however, on December 9, 2002, the House
Government Operations Committee of the General Assembly stayed Rule 1200-13-13-.07; new effective
date February 12, 2003. Emergency rule filed December 13, 2002; effective through May 27, 2003.

1200-13-13-.08    PROVIDERS.

      (1)   Payment in full.

            (a)   All Participating Providers, as defined in this Chapter, must accept as payment in full
                  for provision of covered services to TennCare enrollees, the amounts paid by the MCC
                  plus any copayment required by the TennCare Program to be paid by the individual.

            (b)   Any Non-Participating Providers who provide TennCare Program covered services by
                  authorization from an MCC must accept as payment in full for provision of covered
                  services to TennCare enrollees, the amounts paid by the MCC plus any copayment
                  required by the TennCare Program to be paid by the individual.

            (c)   Any Non-Participating Provider, as defined in this Chapter, who provides TennCare
                  Program covered non-emergency services to TennCare enrollees without authorization
                  from the enrollee’s MCC does so at his own risk. He may not bill the patient for such
                  services except as provided for in Rule 1200-13-13-.08(5).

            (d)   Any Out-of-State Emergency Provider, as defined in this Chapter, who provides
                  covered emergency services to TennCare enrollees in accordance with this Chapter
                  must accept as payment in full the amounts paid by the MCC plus any copayment
                  required by the TennCare Program.

      (2)   In situations where a MCC authorizes a service to be rendered by a provider who is not a
            participating network provider with the MCC, payment to the provider shall be no less than
            eighty percent (80%) of the lowest rate paid by the MCC to equivalent participating network
            providers for the same service. For emergency services provided to an enrollee by a provider
            who is not a participating network provider, the MCC shall reimburse the provider at the rate



October, 2025 (Revised)                             61
TENNCARE MEDICAID                                                                    CHAPTER 1200-13-13

(Rule 1200-13-13-.08, continued)
           of 100% of the lowest rate paid to the MCC’s network providers. Emergency care to enrollees
           shall not require preauthorization.

           (a)   Reserved.

           (b)   Reserved.

           (c)   Reserved.

           (d)   Non-Participating Providers who furnish covered CHOICES services are reimbursed in
                 accordance with Rule 1200-13-01-.05.

           (e)   Non-Participating Providers who furnish covered ECF CHOICES services are
                 reimbursed in accordance with Rule 1200-13-01-.31.

     (3)   Participation in the TennCare program will be limited to providers who:

           (a)   Accept, as payment in full, the amounts paid by the managed care contractor, including
                 copays from the enrollee, or the amounts paid in lieu of the managed care contractor
                 by a third party (Medicare, insurance, etc.);

           (b)   Maintain Tennessee, or the State in which they practice, medical licenses and/or
                 certifications as required by their practice, or licensure by the TDMHDD, if appropriate;

           (c)   Are not under a federal Drug Enforcement Agency (DEA) restriction of their prescribing
                 and/or dispensing certification for scheduled drugs (relative to physicians, osteopaths,
                 dentists and pharmacists);

           (d)   Agree to maintain and provide access to TennCare and/or its agent all TennCare
                 enrollee medical records for five (5) years from the date of service or upon written
                 authorization from TennCare following an audit, whichever is shorter;

           (e)   Provide medical assistance at or above recognized standards of practice; and

           (f)   Comply with all contractual terms between the provider and the managed care
                 contractor and TennCare policies as outlined in federal and state rules and regulations
                 and TennCare provider manuals and bulletins.

           (g)   Failure to comply with any of the above provisions (a) through (f) may subject a
                 provider to the following actions:

                 1.    Sanctions set out in T.C.A. § 71-5-118. In addition, the provider may be subject
                       to stringent review/audit procedures, which may include clinical evaluation of
                       services and a prepayment requirement for documentation and justification for
                       each claim.

                 2.    The Bureau of TennCare may withhold or recover payments to managed care
                       contractors in cases of provider fraud, willful misrepresentation, or flagrant non-
                       compliance with contractual requirements and/or TennCare policies.

                 3.    The Bureau of TennCare may refuse to approve or may suspend provider
                       participation with a provider if any person who has an ownership or controlling
                       interest in the provider, or who is an agent or managing employee of the
                       provider, has been convicted of a criminal offense related to that person’s
                       involvement in any program established under Medicare, Medicaid or the U.S.
                       Title XX Services Program.



October, 2025 (Revised)                           62
TENNCARE MEDICAID                                                                  CHAPTER 1200-13-13

(Rule 1200-13-13-.08, continued)

                 4.    The Bureau of TennCare may refuse to approve or may suspend provider
                       participation if it determines that the provider did not fully and accurately make
                       any disclosure of any person who has ownership or controlling interest in the
                       provider, or is an agent or managing employee of the provider and has been
                       convicted of a criminal offense related to that person’s involvement in any
                       program under Medicare, Medicaid or the U.S. Title XX Services Program since
                       the inception of these programs.

                 5.    The Bureau of TennCare shall refuse to approve or shall suspend provider
                       participation if the appropriate State Board of Licensing or Certification fails to
                       license or certify the provider at any time for any reason or suspends or revokes
                       a license or certification.

                 6.    The Bureau of TennCare shall refuse to approve or shall suspend provider
                       participation upon notification by the U.S. Office of Inspector General Department
                       of Health and Human Services that the provider is not eligible under Medicare or
                       Medicaid for federal financial participation.

                 7.    The Bureau of TennCare may recover from a managed care contractor any
                       payments made by an enrollee and/or his family for a covered service, in total or
                       in part, except as permitted. If a provider knowingly bills an enrollee and/or his
                       family for a covered service, in total or in part, except as permitted, the Bureau of
                       TennCare may terminate the provider’s participation in TennCare.

     (4)   Solicitations and Referrals.

           (a)   Managed care contractors and providers shall not solicit TennCare enrollees by any
                 method offering as enticements other goods and services (free or otherwise) for the
                 opportunity of providing the enrollee with TennCare covered services that are not
                 medically necessary and/or that overutilize the TennCare program.

           (b)   A managed care contractor may request a waiver from this restriction in writing to
                 TennCare. TennCare shall determine the value of a waiver request based upon the
                 medical necessity and need for the solicitation. The managed care contractor may
                 implement the solicitation only upon receipt of a written waiver approval from
                 TennCare. This waiver is not transferable and may be canceled by TennCare upon
                 written notice.

           (c)   TennCare payments for services related to a non-waivered solicitation enticement shall
                 be considered by TennCare as a non-covered service and recouped. Neither the
                 managed care contractor nor the provider may bill the enrollee for non-covered
                 services recouped under this authority.

           (d)   A provider shall not offer or receive remuneration in any form related to the volume or
                 value of referrals made or received from or to another provider.

     (5)   Providers may seek payment from a TennCare enrollee only under the following
           circumstances. These circumstances apply to all TennCare providers, as defined in this
           Chapter, including those who are Out-of-Network Providers in a particular enrollee’s MCC.
           These circumstances include situations where the enrollee may choose to seek an out-of-
           network provider for a specific covered service.

           (a)   If the services are not covered by the TennCare program and, prior to providing the
                 services, the provider informed the enrollee that the services were not covered; or




October, 2025 (Revised)                            63
TENNCARE MEDICAID                                                                     CHAPTER 1200-13-13

(Rule 1200-13-13-.08, continued)
           (b)   If the services are not covered because they are in excess of an enrollee’s benefit limit
                 and one of the following circumstances applies:

                  1.    The provider determines effective on the date of service that the enrollee has
                        reached his/her benefit limit for the particular service being requested and, prior
                        to providing the service, informs the enrollee that the service is not covered and
                        the service will not be paid for by TennCare. The source of the provider’s
                        information must be a database listed on the TennCare website as approved by
                        TennCare on the date of the provider’s inquiry.

                  2.    The provider has information in his/her own records to support the fact that the
                        enrollee has reached his/her benefit limit for the particular service being
                        requested and, prior to providing the service, informs the enrollee that the service
                        is not covered and will not be paid for by TennCare. This information may
                        include:

                        (i)     A previous written denial of a claim on the basis that the service was in
                                excess of the enrollee’s benefit limit for a service within the same benefit
                                category as the service being requested, if the time period applicable to
                                the benefit limit is still in effect; or

                        (ii)    That the provider had previously examined the database referenced in
                                part 1. above and determined that the enrollee had reached his/her
                                benefit limit for the particular service being requested, if the time period
                                applicable to that benefit limit is still in effect; or

                        (iii)   That the provider had personally provided services to the enrollee in
                                excess of his/her benefit limit within the same benefit category as the
                                service being requested, if the time period applicable to that benefit
                                period is still in effect; or

                        (iv)    The enrollee’s MCO has provided confirmation to the provider that the
                                enrollee has reached his/her benefit limit for the applicable service.

                  3.    The provider submits a claim for service to the appropriate managed care
                        contractor (MCC) and receives a written denial of that claim on the basis that the
                        service exceeds the enrollee’s benefit limit. Thereafter, following informing the
                        enrollee and within the remainder of the period applicable to that benefit limit, the
                        provider may bill the enrollee for services within that same exhausted benefit
                        category without having to submit, for repeated MCC denial, claims for those
                        subsequent services. If the provider informed the enrollee prior to providing the
                        service for which the claim was denied that the service would exceed the
                        enrollee’s benefit limit and would not be paid for by TennCare, the provider may
                        bill the enrollee for that service.

                  4.    The provider had previously taken the steps in parts 1., 2. or 3. above and
                        determined that the enrollee had reached his/her benefit limit for the particular
                        service being requested, if the time period applicable to the benefit limit is still in
                        effect, and informs the enrollee, prior to providing the service, that the service is
                        not covered and will not be paid for by TennCare.

            (c)   If the services are covered only with prior authorization and prior authorization has
                  been requested but denied, or is requested and a specified lesser level of care is
                  approved, and the provider has given prior notice to the enrollee that the services are
                  not covered, the enrollee may elect to receive those services for which prior




October, 2025 (Revised)                              64
TENNCARE MEDICAID                                                                  CHAPTER 1200-13-13

(Rule 1200-13-13-.08, continued)
                 authorization has been denied or which exceed the authorized level of care and be
                 billed by the provider for such services.

     (6)   Providers may not seek payment from a TennCare enrollee under the following conditions:

           (a)   The provider knew or should have known about the patient’s TennCare eligibility or
                 pending eligibility prior to providing services.

           (b)   The claim(s) submitted to TennCare or the enrollee’s managed care contractor for
                 payment was/were denied due to provider billing error or a TennCare claim processing
                 error.

           (c)   The provider accepted TennCare assignment on a claim and it is determined that
                 another payer paid an amount equal to or greater than the TennCare allowable
                 amount.

           (d)   The provider failed to comply with TennCare policies and procedures or provided a
                 service which lacks medical necessity or justification.

           (e)   The provider failed to submit or resubmit claims for payment within the time periods
                 required by the managed care contractor or TennCare.

           (f)   The provider failed to ascertain the existence of TennCare eligibility or pending
                 eligibility prior to providing non-emergency services. Even if the enrollee presents
                 another form of insurance, the provider must determine whether the patient is covered
                 under TennCare.

           (g)   The provider failed to inform the enrollee prior to providing a service not covered by
                 TennCare that the service was not covered and the enrollee may be responsible for the
                 cost of the service. Services which are non-covered by virtue of exceeding limitations
                 are exempt from this requirement. Notwithstanding this exemption, providers shall
                 remain obligated to provide notice to enrollees who have exceeded benefit limits in
                 accordance with Rule 1200-13-13-.11.

           (h)   The enrollee failed to keep a scheduled appointment(s).

           (i)   The provider is a TennCare Provider, as defined in this Chapter, but is not participating
                 with a particular enrollee’s MCC and is seeking to bill the enrollee as though the
                 provider were a Non-TennCare Provider, as defined in this Chapter.

     (7)   Providers may seek payment from a person whose TennCare eligibility is pending at the time
           services are provided if the provider informs the person that TennCare assignment will not be
           accepted whether or not eligibility is established retroactively.

     (8)   Providers may seek payment from a person whose TennCare eligibility is pending at the time
           services are provided. Providers may bill such persons at the provider’s usual and customary
           rate for the services rendered. However, all monies collected for TennCare-covered services
           rendered during a period of TennCare eligibility must be refunded when a claim is submitted
           to TennCare if the provider agreed to accept TennCare assignment once retroactive
           TennCare eligibility was established.

     (9)   Providers of inpatient hospital services, outpatient hospital services, skilled nursing facility
           services, independent laboratory and x-ray services, hospice services, and home health
           agencies must be approved for Title XVIII-Medicare in order to be certified as providers under
           the TennCare Program; in the case of hospitals, the hospital must meet state licensure
           requirements and be approved by TennCare as an acute care hospital as of the date of



October, 2025 (Revised)                            65
TENNCARE MEDICAID                                                                    CHAPTER 1200-13-13

(Rule 1200-13-13-.08, continued)
           enrollment in TennCare. Children’s hospitals and State mental hospitals may participate in
           TennCare without having been Medicare approved; however, the hospital must be approved
           by the Joint Commission for Accreditation of Health Care Organizations as a condition of
           participation.

      (10) Pharmacy providers may not waive pharmacy copayments for TennCare Standard enrollees
           as a means of attracting business to their establishments. This does not prohibit a pharmacy
           from exercising professional judgment in cases where an enrollee may have a temporary or
           acute need for a prescribed drug, but is unable, at that moment, to pay the required
           copayment.

      (11) Providers shall not deny services for a Medicaid enrollee’s failure to make copayments.

      (12) All claims must be filed in accordance with the following:

            (a)   Claims filed with an MCC must be submitted in accordance with the requirements and
                  timeframes set forth in the MCC’s contract.

            (b)   All other fee-for-service claims for services delivered outside of the TennCare managed
                  care program must be filed with the Bureau of TennCare as follows:

                  1.    All claims must be filed within one (1) year of the date of service except in the
                        following circumstances:

                        (i)    Recipient eligibility was determined retroactively to the extent that filing
                               within one (1) year was not possible. In such situations, claims must be
                               filed within one (1) year after final determination of eligibility.

                        (ii)   If a claim filed with Medicare on a timely basis does not automatically cross
                               over from the Medicare carrier to the Bureau, a TennCare claim may be
                               filed within six (6) months of notification of payment or denial from
                               Medicare.

                  2.    Should an original claim be denied, any resubmission or follow-up of the initial
                        claim must be received within six (6) months from the date the original claim was
                        filed. The Bureau will not process submissions received after the six (6) month
                        time limit. The one exception is those claims returned due to available third party
                        coverage. These claims must be submitted within sixty (60) days of notice from
                        the third party resource.

                  3.    Should a correction document involving a suspended claim be sent to the
                        provider, the claim will be denied if the correction document is not completed by
                        the provider and returned to the Bureau within ninety (90) days from the date on
                        the document.

                  4.    If claim is not filed within the above timeframes, no reimbursement may be made.

                  5.    Claims will be paid on a first claim approved - first claim paid basis.

                  6.    The Bureau will not reimburse providers for services for which there is no Federal
                        Financial Participation.

Authority: T.C.A. §§ 4-5-202, 4-5-208, 4-5-209, 71-5-105, 71-5-109, and 71-5-134; Acts of 2003, Public
Chapter 412, §1(c); and Executive Order No. 23. Administrative History: Public necessity rule filed July
1, 2002; effective through December 13, 2002. Original rule filed September 30, 2002; to be effective
December 14, 2002; however, on December 9, 2002, the House Government Operations Committee of



October, 2025 (Revised)                             66
TENNCARE MEDICAID                                                                   CHAPTER 1200-13-13

(Rule 1200-13-13-.08, continued)
the General Assembly stayed Rule 1200-13-13-.08; new effective date February 12, 2003. Emergency
rule filed December 13, 2002; effective through May 27, 2003. Amendment by Acts of 2003, Public
Chapter 412, §1(c) filed and effective June 25, 2003. Amendment filed October 12, 2004; effective
December 26, 2004. Public necessity rule filed July 29, 2005; effective through January 10, 2006. Public
necessity rule filed December 29, 2005; expired June 12, 2006. On June 13, 2006, affected rules reverted
to status on December 28, 2005. Amendment filed October 27, 2005; effective January 10, 2006.
Amendment filed March 31, 2006; effective June 14, 2006. Public necessity rule filed September 8, 2008;
effective through February 20, 2009. Amendment filed December 5, 2008; effective February 18, 2009.
Amendment filed February 25, 2009; declared 1200-13-13-.08(2)(b) void and of no effect pursuant to
court opinions issued in Case No. 18-926-II, Chancery Court for the 20th Judicial District, and Case No.
21-1150-II, Chancery Court for the 20th Judicial District, and the Tennessee Court of Appeals opinion
issued in No. M2023-01350-COA-R3-CV, see also Attorney General Opinion 11-78. Emergency rule filed
March 1, 2010; effective through August 28, 2010. Amendment filed May 27, 2010; effective August 25,
2010. Emergency rule filed September 3, 2010; effective through March 2, 2011. Amendment filed
December 2, 2010 to have become effective March 2, 2011 was stayed by the Government Operations
Committee on March 2, 2011; declared 1200-13-13-.08(2)(c) void and of no effect pursuant to court
opinions issued in Case No. 18-926-II, Chancery Court for the 20th Judicial District, and Case No. 21-
1150-II, Chancery Court for the 20th Judicial District, and the Tennessee Court of Appeals opinion issued
in No. M2023-01350-COA-R3-CV, see also Attorney General Opinion 11-78. Emergency rules filed July
1, 2016; effective December 28, 2016. Amendments filed September 30, 2016; effective December 29,
2016.

1200-13-13-.09 THIRD PARTY RESOURCES.

      (1)   Individuals applying for TennCare Medicaid or TennCare Standard coverage shall disclose
            the availability of any third party health care coverage to the agency responsible for
            determining the individual’s eligibility for TennCare.

      (2)   An individual enrolled in TennCare Medicaid or TennCare Standard shall disclose access to
            third party resources to his/her specified Managed Care Contractors as soon as s/he
            becomes aware of the existence of any third party resources.

      (3)   Managed Care Contractors under contract with the Tennessee Departments of Finance and
            Administration or Mental Health and Developmental Disabilities shall provide all third party
            resource information obtained from the plan’s enrollees to the Bureau of TennCare on a
            regular basis as required by their contracts.

      (4)   Managed Care Contractors shall enforce TennCare subrogation rights pursuant to T.C.A. §
            71-5-117.

      (5)   Managed Care Contractors may pay health insurance premiums for their enrollees if such
            payments are determined by the Bureau to be cost effective.

      (6)   TennCare shall be the payor of last resort, except where contrary to federal or state law.

      (7)   Asset Disregards for Qualifying Long Term Care Insurance Policies:

            (a)   Individuals who purchase a qualified long term care insurance policy may have certain
                  assets disregarded in the determination of eligibility for TennCare Medicaid. The
                  Department of Human Services (DHS) shall disregard an individual’s assets up to the
                  amount of payments made by the individual’s qualifying long-term care insurance
                  policy for services covered under the policy at the time of TennCare application.

            (b)   The amount of the individual’s assets properly disregarded under these provisions shall
                  continue to be disregarded through the lifetime of the individual.




October, 2025 (Revised)                             67
TENNCARE MEDICAID                                                                   CHAPTER 1200-13-13

(Rule 1200-13-13-.09, continued)
           (c)   Assets which were disregarded for purposes of Medicaid eligibility determination during
                 the person’s lifetime are also protected from estate recovery. When the amount of
                 assets disregarded during the person’s lifetime was less than total benefits paid by the
                 qualified long term care insurance policy, additional assets may be protected in the
                 estate recovery process up to the amount of payments made by the individual’s
                 qualifying long term care policy for services covered under the policy. If no assets were
                 disregarded during the person’s lifetime, the personal representative may designate
                 assets to protect from estate recovery up to the lesser of the two options specified
                 above, even if a qualified long term care policy’s benefits were not completely
                 exhausted.

      (8)   Upon enrollment in TennCare Medicaid or TennCare Standard an individual assigns to the
            Bureau any rights to third party insurance benefits to which the individual may be entitled.

      (9)   Upon accepting medical assistance, an enrollee in TennCare Medicaid or TennCare
            Standard shall be deemed to have made an assignment to the Bureau of the right to third
            party insurance benefits to which the enrollee may be entitled.

      (10) The Bureau shall utilize direct billing when it is determined that a previously paid service may
           have been covered by a third party.

Authority: T.C.A. §§ 4-5-202, 71-5-105, 71-5-109, and 71-5-117 and Executive Order No. 23.
Administrative History: Public necessity rule filed July 1, 2002; effective through December 13, 2002.
Original rule filed September 30, 2002; to be effective December 14, 2002; however, on December 9,
2002, the House Government Operations Committee of the General Assembly stayed Rule 1200-13-13-
.09; new effective date February 12, 2003. Emergency rule filed December 13, 2002; effective through
May 27, 2003. Amendment filed February 18, 2009; effective May 4, 2009. Amendment filed January 15,
2013; effective April 15, 2013.

1200-13-13-.10    EXCLUSIONS.

      (1)   General exclusions. The following items and services shall not be considered covered
            services by TennCare:

            (a)   Provision of medical assistance which is outside the scope of benefits as defined in
                  these rules.

            (b)   Provision of services to persons who are not enrolled in TennCare, either on the date
                  the services are delivered or retroactively to the date the services are delivered.

            (c)   Services for which there is no Federal Financial Participation (FFP).

            (d)   Services provided outside the United States or its territories.

            (e)   Services provided outside the geographic borders of Tennessee, including
                  transportation to return to Tennessee to receive medical care except in the following
                  circumstances:

                  1.    Emergency medical services are needed because of an emergency medical
                        condition;

                  2.    Non-emergency urgent care services are requested because the recipient’s
                        health would be endangered if he were required to travel, but only upon the
                        explicit prior authorization of the MCC;




October, 2025 (Revised)                             68
TENNCARE MEDICAID                                                                    CHAPTER 1200-13-13

(Rule 1200-13-13-.10, continued)
                 3.    The covered medical service would not be readily available within Tennessee if
                        the enrollee was physically located in Tennessee at the time of need and the
                        covered service is explicitly prior authorized by the enrollee’s TennCare MCC; or

                  4.    The out-of-state provider is participating in the enrollee’s MCC network.

            (f)   Investigative or experimental services or procedures including, but not limited to:

                  1.    Drug or device that lacks FDA approval except when medically necessary as
                        defined by TennCare;

                  2.    Drug or device that lacks approval of facility’s Institutional Review Board;

                  3.    Requested treatment that is the subject of Phase I or Phase II clinical trials or the
                        investigational arm of Phase III clinical trials; or

                  4.    A requested service about which prevailing opinion among experts is that further
                        study is required to determine safety, efficacy, or long-term clinical outcomes of
                        requested service.

            (g)   Services which are delivered in connection with, or required by, an item or service not
                  covered by TennCare, including the transportation to receive such non-covered
                  services, except that treatment of conditions resulting from the provision of non-
                  covered services may be covered if medically necessary, notwithstanding the
                  exclusions set out herein.

            (h)   Items or services furnished to provide a safe surrounding, including the charges for
                  providing a surrounding free from exposure that can worsen the disease or injury.

            (i)   Non-emergency services that are ordered or furnished by an out-of-network provider
                  and that have not been approved by the enrollee’s MCC. An exception exists for dually
                  eligible enrollees. In-network care ordered by out-of-network providers is covered for
                  dually eligible enrollees unless the MCO has informed such enrollee in advance of a
                  request for a service that the specific service requires prior authorization and an order
                  from an in-network provider.

            (j)   Services that are free to the public, with the exception of services delivered in the
                  schools pursuant to the Individuals with Disabilities in Education Act (IDEA).

            (k)   Items or services ordered, prescribed, administered, supplied, or provided by an
                  individual or entity that has been excluded from participation in the Medicaid program
                  under the authority of the United States Department of Health and Human Services or
                  the Bureau of TennCare.

            (l)   Items or services ordered, prescribed, administered, supplied, or provided by an
                  individual or entity that is not licensed by the appropriate licensing board.

            (m)   Items or services outside the scope and/or authority of a provider’s specialty and/or
                  area of practice.

            (n)   Items or services to the extent that Medicare or a third party payer is legally
                  responsible to pay or would have been legally responsible to pay except for the
                  enrollee’s or the treating provider’s failure to comply with the requirements for coverage
                  of such services.




October, 2025 (Revised)                             69
TENNCARE MEDICAID                                                                     CHAPTER 1200-13-13

(Rule 1200-13-13-.10, continued)
           (o)   Medical services for inmates confined in a local, state, or federal prison, jail, or other
                 penal or correctional facility, including a furlough from such facility.

            (p)   Services delivered by a specific provider, even a provider who is an in-network provider
                  with the enrollee’s managed care plan, when the managed care plan has offered the
                  enrollee the services of a qualified provider who is available to provide the needed
                  services.

            (q)   Items or services that are not covered by Medicare or a third party payer for an
                  individual enrollee because the item or service is essentially equivalent to a Medicare
                  or third party payer service that is being covered (e.g., home health services for
                  individuals receiving hospice care).

      (2)   Exception to General and Specific Exclusions: COST EFFECTIVE ALTERNATIVE. As
            approved by CMS and/or authorized by Policy BEN 08-001, each MCC has sole discretionary
            authority to provide certain cost effective alternatives when providing appropriate medically
            necessary care. These services are otherwise excluded and are not covered services unless
            the MCC has followed the procedures set forth in Policy BEN 08-001 and opts at its sole
            discretion to provide such requested item or service.

      (3)   Specific exclusions. The following services, products, and supplies are specifically excluded
            from coverage under the TennCare Section 1115 waiver program unless excepted by
            paragraph (2) herein. Some of these services may be covered under the CHOICES or ECF
            CHOICES programs or outside the managed care program under a Section 1915(c) Home
            and Community Based Services waiver when provided as part of an approved plan of care, in
            accordance with the appropriate approved TennCare Home and Community Based Services
            waiver.

            (a)   Services, products, and supplies that are specifically excluded from coverage except
                  as medically necessary for children under the age of 21:

                  1.    Audiological therapy or training

                  2.    Beds and bedding equipment as follows:

                        (i)     Powered air flotation beds, air fluidized beds (including Clinitron beds),
                                water pressure mattress, or gel mattress

                                For persons age 21 and older: Not covered unless a member has both
                                severely impaired mobility (i.e., unable to make independent changes in
                                body position to alleviate pain or pressure) and any stage pressure ulcer
                                on the trunk or pelvis combined with at least one of the following: impaired
                                nutritional status, fecal or urinary incontinence, altered sensory perception,
                                or compromised circulatory status.

                        (ii)    Bead beds, or similar devices

                        (iii)   Bed boards

                        (iv)    Bedding and bed casings

                        (v)     Ortho-prone beds

                        (vi)    Oscillating beds

                        (vii)   Springbase beds



October, 2025 (Revised)                              70
TENNCARE MEDICAID                                                                CHAPTER 1200-13-13

(Rule 1200-13-13-.10, continued)

                       (viii) Vail beds, or similar bed

                 3.    Biofeedback

                 4.    Cushions, pads, and mattresses as follows:

                       (i)     Aquamatic K Pads

                       (ii)    Elbow protectors

                       (iii)   Heat and massage foam cushion pads

                       (iv)    Heating pads

                       (v)     Heel protectors

                       (vi)    Lamb’s wool pads

                       (vii)   Steam packs

                 5.    Diagnostic tests conducted solely for the purpose of evaluating the need for a
                       service which is excluded from coverage under these rules.

                 6.    Ear plugs

                 7.    Food supplements and substitutes including formulas

                       For persons 21 years of age and older: Not covered, except that Parenteral
                       Nutrition formulas, Enteral Nutrition formulas for tube feedings and
                       phenylalanine-free formulas (not foods) used to treat PKU, as required by T.C.A.
                       § 56-7-2505, are covered for adults. In addition, oral liquid nutrition may be
                       covered when medically necessary for adults with swallowing or breathing
                       disorders who are severely underweight (BMI<15 kg/m2) and physically
                       incapable of otherwise consuming a sufficient intake of food to meet basic
                       nutritional requirements.

                 8.    Hearing services, including the prescribing, fitting, or changing of hearing aids
                       and cochlear implants

                 9.    Humidifiers (central or room) and dehumidifiers

                 10.   Inpatient rehabilitation facility services

                 11.   Medical supplies, over-the-counter, as follows:

                       (i)     Alcohol, rubbing

                       (ii)    Band-aids

                       (iii)   Cotton balls

                       (iv)    Eyewash

                       (v)     Peroxide




October, 2025 (Revised)                              71
TENNCARE MEDICAID                                                                      CHAPTER 1200-13-13

(Rule 1200-13-13-.10, continued)
                       (vi) Q-tips or cotton swabs

                 12.   Nutritional supplements and vitamins, over-the-counter, except that prenatal
                       vitamins for pregnant women and folic acid for women of childbearing age are
                       covered

                 13.   Orthodontic services, except as defined in Rule 1200-13-13-.04(1)(b)5. or 1200-
                       13-14-.04(1)(b)5.

                 14.   Certain pharmacy items as follows:

                       (i)     Agents when used for anorexia or weight loss, except for weight loss drugs
                               when prescribed for treatment of obesity

                       (ii)    Agents when used to promote fertility

                       (iii)   Agents when used for cosmetic purposes or hair growth

                       (iv)    Agents when used for the symptomatic relief of cough and colds

                       (v)     Covered outpatient drugs which the manufacturer seeks to require as a
                               condition of sale that associated tests or monitoring services be purchased
                               exclusively from the manufacturer or its designee

                       (vi)    Nonprescription drugs

                       (vii)   Buprenorphine-containing products used for treatment of opiate addiction
                               in excess of the covered amounts listed below:

                               (I)     Dosage of sixteen milligrams (16 mg) per day for a period of up to six
                                       (6) months (183 days) from the initiation of therapy or from the
                                       conclusion of pregnancy, if the enrollee is pregnant during this initial
                                       maximum dosage therapy; and

                               (II)    Dosage of eight milligrams (8 mg) per day after the sixth (6th) month
                                       (183rd day) of therapy.

                       (viii) Sedative hypnotic medications in dosage amounts that exceed the dosage
                              amounts listed below:

                               (I)     Fourteen (14) pills per month for sedative hypnotic formulations in pill
                                       form such as Ambien and Lunesta;

                               (II)    One hundred forty milliliters (140 ml) per month of chloral hydrate; or

                               (III)   One (1) bottle every sixty (60) days of Zolpimist.

                       (ix)    Allergy medications

                       (x)     Opioid products are restricted as set out in Rule .04(1)(c)12.

                 15.   Purchase, repair, or replacement of materials or equipment when the reason for
                       the purchase, repair, or replacement is the result of enrollee abuse

                 16.   Purchase, repair, or replacement of materials or equipment that has been stolen
                       or destroyed except when the following documentation is provided:



October, 2025 (Revised)                               72
TENNCARE MEDICAID                                                                    CHAPTER 1200-13-13

(Rule 1200-13-13-.10, continued)

                       (i)     Explanation of continuing medical necessity for the item, and

                       (ii)    Explanation that the item was stolen or destroyed, and

                       (iii)   Copy of police, fire department, or insurance report if applicable

                 17.   Radial keratotomy

                 18.   Reimbursement to a provider or enrollee for the replacement of a rented durable
                       medical equipment (DME) item that is stolen or destroyed

                 19.   Repair of DME items not covered by TennCare

                 20.   Repair of DME items covered under the provider’s or manufacturer’s warranty

                 21.   Repair of a rented DME item

                 22.   Speech, language, and hearing services to address speech problems caused by
                       mental, psychoneurotic, or personality disorders

                 23.   Standing tables

                 24.   Vision services for persons 21 years of age and older that are not needed to treat
                       a systemic disease process including, but not limited to:

                       (i)     Eyeglasses, sunglasses, and/or contact lenses for persons aged 21 and
                               older, including eye examinations for the purpose of prescribing, fitting, or
                               changing eyeglasses, sunglasses, and/or contact lenses; procedures
                               performed to determine the refractive state of the eye(s); one pair of
                               cataract glasses or lenses is covered for adults following cataract surgery

                       (ii)    LASIK

                       (iii)   Orthoptics

                       (iv)    Vision perception training

                       (v)     Vision therapy

           (b)   Services, products, and supplies that are specifically excluded from coverage under the
                 TennCare program.

                 1.    Air cleaners, purifiers, or HEPA filters

                 2.    Alcoholic beverages

                 3.    Animal therapy including, but not limited to:

                       (i)     Dolphin therapy

                       (ii)    Equine therapy

                       (iii)   Hippo therapy

                       (iv)    Pet therapy



October, 2025 (Revised)                             73
TENNCARE MEDICAID                                                                  CHAPTER 1200-13-13

(Rule 1200-13-13-.10, continued)

                 4.    Art therapy

                 5.    Autopsy

                 6.    Bathtub equipment and supplies as follows:

                       (i)     Paraffin baths

                       (ii)    Sauna baths

                 7.    Beds and bedding equipment as follows:

                       (i)     Adjust-a-Beds, lounge beds, or similar devices

                       (ii)    Pillows

                       (iii)   Waterbeds

                 8.    Bioenergetic therapy

                 9.    Body adornment and enhancement services including, but not limited to:

                       (i)     Body piercing

                       (ii)    Breast augmentation

                       (iii)   Breast capsulectomy

                       (iv)    Breast implant removal that is not medically indicated

                       (v)     Ear piercing

                       (vi)    Hair transplantation, and agents for hair growth

                       (vii)   Tattoos or removal of tattoos

                       (viii) Tongue splitting or repair of tongue splitting

                       (ix)    Wigs or hairpieces

                 10.   Breathing equipment as follows:

                       (i)     Intrapulmonary Percussive Ventilators (IPVs)

                       (ii)    Spirometers, except for peak flow meters for medical management of
                               asthma and incentive spirometers

                       (iii)   Vaporizers

                 11.   Carbon dioxide therapy

                 12.   Care facilities or services, the primary purpose of which is non-medical,
                       including, but not limited to:

                       (i)     Day care



October, 2025 (Revised)                              74
TENNCARE MEDICAID                                                                       CHAPTER 1200-13-13

(Rule 1200-13-13-.10, continued)

                       (ii)    Evening care centers

                       (iii)   Respite care, except as a component of Mental Health Crisis Services
                               benefits or Hospice Care benefits as provided at Rule 1200-13-13-
                               .04(1)(b).

                       (iv)    Rest cures

                       (v)     Social or diversion services related to the judicial system

                 13.   Carotid body tumor, excision of, as treatment for asthma

                 14.   Chelation therapy, except for the treatment of heavy metal poisoning or
                       secondary hemochromatosis in selected settings. Chelation therapy for treatment
                       of arteriosclerosis or autism is not covered. Chelation therapy for asymptomatic
                       individuals is not covered. In the case of lead poisoning, the lead levels must be
                       extremely high. For children, a minimum level of 45 ug/dl is recommended.
                       Because chelation therapy and its after-effects must be continuously monitored
                       for possible adverse reactions, chelation therapy is covered only in inpatient or
                       outpatient hospital settings, renal dialysis facilities, and skilled nursing facilities. It
                       is not covered in an office setting, an ambulatory surgical center, or a home
                       setting.

                 15.   Clothing, including adaptive clothing

                 16.   Cold therapy devices

                 17.   Comfort and convenience items including, but not limited to:

                       (i)     Corn plasters

                       (ii)    Garter belts

                       (iii)   Incontinence products (including, but not limited to, diapers, liners, and
                               underpads) are not covered unless needed for a medical condition and are
                               not covered for children age 3 and younger, except Infant Diapers as
                               described in Rule .04.

                       (iv)    Support stockings, when light or medium weight or prescribed for relief of
                               tired or aching legs or treatment of spider/varicose veins. Surgical weight
                               stockings prescribed by a doctor or other qualified licensed health care
                               practitioner for the treatment of chronic foot/ankle swelling, venous
                               insufficiencies, or other medical conditions and thrombo-embolic deterrent
                               support stockings for pre- and post-surgical procedures are covered as
                               medically necessary.

                 18.   Computers, personal, and peripherals including, but not limited to printers,
                       modems, monitors, scanners, and software, including their use in conjunction
                       with an Augmentative Communication Device

                 19.   Convalescent care.

                 20.   Cosmetic dentistry, cosmetic oral surgery, and cosmetic orthodontic services

                 21.   Cosmetic prosthetic devices



October, 2025 (Revised)                              75
TENNCARE MEDICAID                                                                   CHAPTER 1200-13-13

(Rule 1200-13-13-.10, continued)

                 22.   Cosmetic surgery or surgical procedures primarily for the purpose of changing
                       the appearance of any part of the body to improve appearance or self-esteem,
                       including scar revision. The following services are not considered cosmetic
                       services:

                       (i)     Reconstructive surgery to correct the results of an injury or disease

                       (ii)    Surgery to treat congenital defects (such as cleft lip and cleft palate) to
                               restore normal bodily function

                       (iii)   Surgery to reconstruct a breast after mastectomy that was done to treat a
                               disease, or as a continuation of a staged reconstructive procedure

                       (iv)    In accordance with Tennessee law, surgery of the non-diseased breast
                               following mastectomy and reconstruction to create symmetrical
                               appearance

                       (v)     Surgery for the improvement of the functioning of a malformed body
                               member

                       (vi)    Reduction mammoplasty, when the minimum amount of breast material to
                               be removed is equal to or greater than the 22nd percentile of the Schnur
                               Sliding Scale based on the individual’s body surface area.

                 23.   Dance therapy

                 24.   Services provided solely or primarily for educational purposes, including, but not
                       limited to:

                       (i)     Academic performance testing

                       (ii)    Educational tests and training programs

                       (iii)   Habilitation

                       (iv)    Job training

                       (v)     Lamaze classes

                       (vi)    Lovaas therapy

                       (vii)   Picture illustrations

                       (viii) Remedial education

                       (ix)    Sign language instruction

                       (x)     Special education

                       (xi)    Tutors

                 25.   Encounter groups or workshops

                 26.   Environmental modifications including, but not limited to:




October, 2025 (Revised)                                76
TENNCARE MEDICAID                                                                CHAPTER 1200-13-13

(Rule 1200-13-13-.10, continued)
                       (i)   Air conditioners, central or unit

                        (ii)    Micronaire environmentals, and similar devices

                        (iii)   Pollen extractors

                        (iv)    Portable room heaters

                        (v)     Vacuum systems for dust filtering

                        (vi)    Water purifiers

                        (vii)   Water softeners

                  27.   Exercise equipment including, but not limited to:

                        (i)     Exercise equipment

                        (ii)    Exercycles (including cardiac use)

                        (iii)   Functional electrical stimulation

                        (iv)    Gravitronic traction devices

                        (v)     Gravity guidance inversion boots

                        (vi)    Parallel bars

                        (vii)   Pulse tachometers

                        (viii) Tilt tables when used for inversion

                        (ix)    Training balls

                        (x)     Treadmill exercisers

                        (xi)    Weighted quad boots

                  28.   Food and food products (distinct from food supplements or substitutes, as
                        defined in Rule 1200-13-13-.10(3)(a)10.), including but not limited to specialty
                        food items for use in diets such as:

                        (i)     Low-phenylalanine or phenylalanine-free

                        (ii)    Gluten-free

                        (iii)   Casein-free

                        (iv)    Ketogenic

                  29.   Generators and auxiliary power equipment that may be used to provide power for
                        covered medical equipment or for any purpose

                  30.   Grooming services including, but not limited to:

                        (i)     Barber services



October, 2025 (Revised)                                77
TENNCARE MEDICAID                                                                 CHAPTER 1200-13-13

(Rule 1200-13-13-.10, continued)

                       (ii)    Beauty services

                       (iii)   Electrolysis

                       (iv)    Hairpieces or wigs

                       (v)     Manicures

                       (vi)    Pedicures

                 31.   Hair analysis

                 32.   Home health aide services or services from any other individual or agency that
                       are for the primary purpose of safety monitoring

                 33.   Home modifications and items for use in the home

                       (i)     Decks

                       (ii)    Enlarged doorways

                       (iii)   Environmental accessibility modifications such as grab bars and ramps

                       (iv)    Fences

                       (v)     Furniture, indoor or outdoor

                       (vi)    Handrails

                       (vii)   Meals

                       (viii) Overbed tables

                       (ix)    Patios, sidewalks, driveways, and concrete slabs

                       (x)     Plexiglass

                       (xi)    Plumbing repairs

                       (xii)   Porch gliders

                       (xiii) Rollabout chairs

                       (xiv) Room additions and room expansions

                       (xv)    Telephone alert systems

                       (xvi) Telephone arms

                       (xvii) Telephone service in home

                       (xviii) Televisions

                       (xix) Tilt tables when used for inversion




October, 2025 (Revised)                             78
TENNCARE MEDICAID                                                                     CHAPTER 1200-13-13

(Rule 1200-13-13-.10, continued)
                       (xx) Toilet trainers and potty chairs. Positioning commodes and toilet supports
                             are covered as medically necessary.

                       (xxi) Utilities (gas, electric, water, etc.)

                 34.   Homemaker services

                 35.   Hospital inpatient items that are not directly related to the treatment of an injury
                       or illness (such as radios, TVs, movies, telephones, massage, guest beds,
                       haircuts, hair styling, guest trays, etc.)

                 36.   Hotel charges, unless pre-approved in conjunction with a transplant or as part of
                       a non-emergency transportation service

                 37.   Hypnosis or hypnotherapy

                 38.   Infant/child car seats, except that adaptive car seats may be covered for a
                       person with disabilities such as severe cerebral palsy, spina bifida, muscular
                       dystrophy, and similar disorders who meets all of the following conditions:

                       (i)     Cannot sit upright unassisted, and

                       (ii)    Infant/child care seats are too small or do not provide adequate support,
                               and

                       (iii)   Safe automobile transport is not otherwise possible.

                 39.   Infertility or impotence services including, but not limited to:

                       (i)     Artificial insemination services

                       (ii)    Purchase of donor sperm and any charges for the storage of sperm

                       (iii)   Purchase of donor eggs, and any charges associated with care of the
                               donor required for donor egg retrievals or transfers of gestational carriers

                       (iv)    Cryopreservation and storage of cryopreserved embryos

                       (v)     Services associated with a gestational carrier program (surrogate
                               parenting) for the recipient or the gestational carrier

                       (vi)    Fertility drugs

                       (vii)   Home ovulation prediction kits

                       (viii) Services for couples in which one of the partners has had a previous
                              sterilization procedure, with or without reversal

                       (ix)    Reversal of sterilization procedures

                       (x)     Any other service or procedure intended to create a pregnancy

                       (xi)    Testing and/or treatment, including therapy, supplies, and counseling, for
                               frigidity or impotence

                 40.   Injections for the treatment of pain such as:



October, 2025 (Revised)                              79
TENNCARE MEDICAID                                                                     CHAPTER 1200-13-13

(Rule 1200-13-13-.10, continued)

                       (i)     Facet/medial branch injections for therapeutic purposes

                       (ii)    Medial branch injections for diagnostic purposes in excess of four (4)
                               injections in a calendar year

                       (iii)   Trigger point injections in excess of four (4) injections per muscle trigger
                               point during any period of six (6) consecutive months

                       (iv)    Epidural steroid injections in excess of three (3) injections during any
                               period of six (6) consecutive months, except epidural injections associated
                               with childbirth

                 41.   Lamps such as:

                       (i)     Heating lamps

                       (ii)    Lava lamps

                       (iii)   Sunlamps

                       (iv)    Ultraviolet lamps

                 42.   Lifts as follows:

                       (i)     Automobile van lifts

                       (ii)    Electric powered recliner, elevating seats, and lift chairs

                       (iii)   Elevators

                       (iv)    Overhead or ceiling lifts, ceiling track system lifts, or wall mounted lifts
                               when installation would require significant structural modification and/or
                               renovation to the dwelling (e.g., moving walls, enlarging passageways,
                               strengthening ceilings and supports). The request for prior authorization
                               must include a specific breakdown of equipment and installation costs,
                               specifying all required structural modifications (however minor) and the
                               cost associated thereto.

                       (v)     Stairway lifts, stair glides, and platform lifts, including but not limited to
                               Wheel-O-Vators

                 43.   Ligation of mammary arteries, unilateral or bilateral

                 44.   Megavitamin therapy

                 45.   Motor vehicle parts and services including, but not limited to:

                       (i)     Automobile controls

                       (ii)    Automobile repairs or modifications

                 46.   Music therapy

                 47.   Nail analysis




October, 2025 (Revised)                               80
TENNCARE MEDICAID                                                                    CHAPTER 1200-13-13

(Rule 1200-13-13-.10, continued)
                 48. Naturopathic services

                 49.   Necropsy

                 50.   Organ and tissue transplants that have been determined experimental or
                       investigational

                 51.   Organ and tissue donor services provided in connection with organ or tissue
                       transplants covered pursuant to Rule 1200-13-13-.04(1)(b)22., including, but not
                       limited to:

                       (i)     Transplants from a donor who is a living TennCare enrollee and the
                               transplant is to a non-TennCare enrollee

                       (ii)    Donor services other than the direct services related to organ procurement
                               (such as, hospitalization, physician services, anesthesia)

                       (iii)   Hotels, meals, or similar items provided outside the hospital setting for the
                               donor

                       (iv)    Any costs incurred by the next of kin of the donor

                       (v)     Any services provided outside of any “bundled rates” after the donor is
                               discharged from the hospital

                 52.   Oxygen, except when provided under the order of a physician and administered
                       under the direction of a physician

                 53.   Oxygen, preset system (flow rate not adjustable)

                 54.   Certain pharmacy items as follows: DESI, LTE, and IRS drugs

                 55.   Play therapy

                 56.   Primal therapy

                 57.   Prophylactic use of stainless steel crowns

                 58.   Psychodrama

                 59.   Psychogenic sexual dysfunction or transformation services

                 60.   Purging

                 61.   Recertification of patients in Level 1 and Level II Nursing Facilities

                 62.   Recreational therapy

                 63.   Religious counseling

                 64.   Retreats for mental disorders

                 65.   Rolfing




October, 2025 (Revised)                             81
TENNCARE MEDICAID                                                                   CHAPTER 1200-13-13

(Rule 1200-13-13-.10, continued)
                 66. Routine health services which may be required by an employer; or by a facility
                        where an individual lives, goes to school, or works; or by the enrollee’s intent to
                        travel

                        (i)     Drug screenings

                        (ii)    Employment and pre-employment physicals

                        (iii)   Fitness to duty examinations

                        (iv)    Immunizations related to travel or work

                        (v)     Insurance physicals

                        (vi)    Job related illness or injury covered by workers’ compensation

                  67.   Sensitivity training or workshops

                  68.   Sensory integration therapy and equipment used in sensory integration therapy
                        including, but not limited to:

                        (i)     Ankle weights

                        (ii)    Floor mats

                        (iii)   Mini-trampolines

                        (iv)    Poof chairs

                        (v)     Sensory balls

                        (vi)    Sky chairs

                        (vii)   Suspension swings

                        (viii) Trampolines

                        (ix)    Therapy balls

                        (x)     Weighted blankets or weighted vests

                  69.   Sensory stimulation services

                  70.   Services provided by immediate relatives, i.e., a spouse, parent, grandparent,
                        stepparent, child, grandchild, brother, sister, half brother, half sister, a spouse’s
                        parents or stepparents, or members of the recipient’s household, except that
                        Home Health Services and Private Duty Nursing Services may be delivered by
                        an immediate family member, provided that the immediate family member is a
                        qualified provider for Home Health Services or Private Duty Nursing and
                        otherwise meets the requirements for Participating Providers under this Chapter.

                  71.   Sex change or transformation surgery

                  72.   Sexual dysfunction or inadequacy services and medicine, including drugs for
                        erectile dysfunctions and penile implant devices




October, 2025 (Revised)                               82
TENNCARE MEDICAID                                                                  CHAPTER 1200-13-13

(Rule 1200-13-13-.10, continued)
                 73. Sitter services

                 74.   Speech devices as follows:

                       (i)     Phone mirror handivoice

                       (ii)    Speech software

                       (iii)   Speech teaching machines

                 75.   Sphygmomanometers (blood pressure cuffs)

                 76.   Stethoscopes

                 77.   Supports: Cervical pillows

                 78.   TENS (transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation) units for the treatment of
                       chronic lower back pain

                 79.   Thermograms

                 80.   Thermography

                 81.   Time involved in completing necessary forms, claims, or reports

                 82.   Tinnitus maskers

                 83.   Toy equipment such as: Flash switches (for toys)

                 84.   Transportation costs as follows:

                       (i)     Transportation to a provider who is outside the geographical access
                               standards that the MCC is required to meet when a network provider is
                               available within such geographical access standards or, in the case of
                               Medicare beneficiaries, transportation to Medicare providers who are
                               outside the geographical access standards of the TennCare program when
                               there are Medicare providers available within those standards

                       (ii)    Mileage reimbursement, car rental fees, or other reimbursement for use of
                               a private vehicle unless prior authorized by the MCC in lieu of contracted
                               transportation services

                       (iii)   Transportation back to Tennessee from vacation or other travel out-of-state
                               in order to access non-emergency covered services (unless authorized by
                               the MCC)

                       (iv)    Any non-emergency out-of-state transportation, including airfare, that has
                               not been prior authorized by the MCC. This includes the costs of
                               transportation to obtain out-of-state care that has been authorized by the
                               MCC. Out-of-state transportation must be prior authorized independently of
                               out-of-state care.

                 85.   Transsexual surgery

                 86.   Urine drug testing that, within a calendar year, is in excess of twenty-four (24)
                       presumptive urine drug tests using optical observation, and twelve (12)


October, 2025 (Revised)                             83
TENNCARE MEDICAID                                                                    CHAPTER 1200-13-13

(Rule 1200-13-13-.10, continued)
                        presumptive urine drug tests using instrument chemistry analyzers, and twelve
                        (12) definitive drug urine tests

                 87.   Vagus nerve stimulators, except after conventional therapy has failed in treating
                       partial onset of seizures

                 88.   Weight loss or weight gain and physical fitness programs including, but not
                       limited to:

                       (i)     Dietary programs of weight loss programs, including, but not limited to,
                               Optifast, Nutrisystem, and other similar programs or exercise programs.
                               Food supplements will not be authorized for use in weight loss programs or
                               for weight gain.

                       (ii)    Health clubs, membership fees (e.g., YMCA)

                       (iii)   Marathons, activity and entry fees

                       (iv)    Swimming pools

                 89.   Wheelchairs and wheelchair accessories as follows:

                       (i)     Wheelchairs defined by CMS as power operated vehicles (POVs), namely,
                               scooters and devices with three (3) or four (4) wheels that have tiller
                               steering and limited seat modification capabilities (i.e. provide little or no
                               back support).

                       (ii)    Standing wheelchairs. However a power standing system is covered as set
                               out in the definition of Power Seating Accessories in Rule 1200-13-13-.01.

                       (iii)   Stair climbing wheelchairs.

                       (iv)    Recreational wheelchairs.

                 90.   Whirlpools and whirlpool equipment such as:

                       (i)     Action bath hydro massage

                       (ii)    Aero massage

                       (iii)   Aqua whirl

                       (iv)    Aquasage pump, or similar devices

                       (v)     Hand-D-Jets, or similar devices

                       (vi)    Jacuzzis, or similar devices

                       (vii)   Turbojets

                       (viii) Whirlpool bath equipment

                       (ix)    Whirlpool pumps

Authority: T.C.A. §§ 4-5-202, 4-5-203, 4-5-208, 71-5-102, 71-5-105, 71-5-107, 71-5-109, 71-5-113, 71-5-
134, and 71-5-1404; 42 C.F.R. Part 431 Subpart E; 42 C.F.R. Part 438 Subpart F; Executive Order No.



October, 2025 (Revised)                             84
TENNCARE MEDICAID                                                                  CHAPTER 1200-13-13

(Rule 1200-13-13-.10, continued)
23; Public Chapter 473, Acts of 2011; and 2025 Public Chapter No. 530. Administrative History: Public
necessity rule filed July 1, 2002; effective through December 13, 2002. Original rule filed September 30,
2002; to be effective December 14, 2002; however, on December 9, 2002, the House Government
Operations Committee of the General Assembly stayed Rule 1200-13-13-.10; new effective date
February 12, 2003. Emergency rule filed December 13, 2002; effective through May 27, 2003. Repeal
and new rule filed October 27, 2005; effective January 10, 2006. Public necessity rules filed May 3, 2006;
effective through October 15, 2006. Public necessity rule filed May 3, 2006; effective through October 15,
2006. Amendment filed July 28, 2006; effective October 11, 2006. Public necessity rule filed February 2,
2007; effective through July 16, 2007. Amendment filed January 30, 2007; effective April 15, 2007.
Amendment filed May 2, 2007; effective July 16, 2007. Amendment filed June 27, 2007; effective Sept 10,
2007. Amendment filed February 8, 2008; effective April 23, 2008. Amendment filed February 11, 2008;
effective April 26, 2008. Amendment filed April 2, 2008; effective June 16, 2008. Amendments filed
August 19, 2008; effective November 2, 2008. Amendment filed July 28, 2009; effective October 26,
2009. Amendment filed November 9, 2009; effective February 7, 2010. Emergency rule filed March 1,
2010; effective through August 28, 2010. Amendment filed May 27, 2010; effective August 25, 2010.
Amendment filed October 26, 2010; effective January 24, 2011. Amendment filed December 14, 2010;
effective May 31, 2011. Emergency rule filed July 1, 2011; effective through December 28, 2011.
Emergency rule filed August 2, 2011; effective through January 29, 2012. Amendment filed September
23, 2011; effective December 22, 2011. Amendment filed October 28, 2011; effective January 26, 2012.
Emergency rule filed September 27, 2013; effective through March 26, 2014. Amendment filed July 1,
2013; effective September 29, 2013. Amendment filed September 27, 2013; effective December 26,
2013. Amendment filed December 17, 2013; effective March 17, 2014. Amendments filed December 23,
2014; effective March 23, 2015. Emergency rule filed September 30, 2015; effective through March 28,
2016. Amendments filed December 29, 2015; effective March 28, 2016. Amendments filed December 30,
2015; effective March 29, 2016. Emergency rules filed June 24, 2016; effective through December 21,
2016. Emergency rules filed July 1, 2016; effective through December 28, 2016. Amendments filed
September 13, 2016; effective December 12, 2016. Amendments filed September 30, 2016; effective
December 29, 2016. Amendments filed September 25, 2017; effective December 24, 2017. Emergency
rules filed January 16, 2018; effective through July 15, 2018. Amendments filed April 9, 2018; effective
July 8, 2018. Amendments filed July 8, 2021; effective October 6, 2021. Amendments filed February 16,
2022; effective May 17, 2022. Emergency rules filed December 27, 2022 to become effective January 1,
2023; effective through June 30, 2023. Amendments filed January 19, 2023; effective April 19, 2023.
Emergency rules filed August 7, 2024; effective through February 3, 2025. Amendments filed November
4, 2024; effective February 2, 2025. Emergency rules filed August 1, 2025; effective through January 28,
2026. Amendments filed July 7, 2025; effective October 5, 2025.

1200-13-13-.11 APPEAL OF ADVERSE BENEFIT DETERMINATIONS.

      (1)   Notice Requirements.

            (a)   When Written Notice is Required.

                  1.    A written notice shall be given to an enrollee by his/her MCC of any adverse
                        benefit determination.

                  2.    A written notice shall be given to an enrollee of any MCC-initiated reduction,
                        termination or suspension of inpatient hospital care.

                  3.    A written notice shall be given to an enrollee of any provider-initiated reduction,
                        termination or suspension.

                  4.    Appropriate notice shall be given to an enrollee by the State or MCC when a
                        claim for service or reimbursement is denied because an enrollee has exceeded
                        a benefit limit. Such notice shall not be subject to the requirements of Rule 1200-
                        13-13-.11(1)(c)1. During the applicable time period for each benefit limit, such
                        notice shall only be provided the first time a claim is denied because an enrollee



October, 2025 (Revised)                            85
TENNCARE MEDICAID                                                                  CHAPTER 1200-13-13

(Rule 1200-13-13-.11, continued)
                        has exceeded a benefit limit. The State or MCC will not be required to provide
                        any notice when an enrollee is approaching or reaches a benefit limit.

                 5.    Appropriate notice shall be given to an enrollee by a provider when an enrollee
                       exceeds a non-pharmacy benefit limit in the following circumstances:

                       (i)    The provider denies the request for a non-pharmacy service because an
                              enrollee has exceeded the applicable benefit limit; or

                       (ii)   The provider informs an enrollee that the non-pharmacy service will not be
                              covered by TennCare because he/she has exceeded the applicable benefit
                              limit and the enrollee chooses not to receive the service.

                 During the applicable time period for each non-pharmacy benefit limit, providers shall
                 only be required to issue this notice the first time an enrollee does not receive a non-
                 pharmacy service from the provider because he/she has exceeded the applicable
                 benefit limit. Such notice shall not be subject to the requirements of Rule 1200-13-13-
                 .11(1)(c)1. Providers will not be required to issue any notice when an enrollee is
                 approaching or reaches a non-pharmacy benefit limit.

           (b)   Timing of Written Notice.

                 1.    Written notice of MCC-initiated reduction, termination or suspension of medical
                       assistance must be provided to an enrollee within the time frames required by 42
                       C.F.R. §§ 431.210 - 431.214 (usually ten (10) days in advance). However, in
                       instances of MCC-initiated reduction, termination or suspension of inpatient
                       hospital treatment, the notice may be provided to an enrollee the same day of the
                       proposed action. Where applicable and not in conflict with this rule, the
                       exceptions set out at 42 C.F.R. §§ 431.211 - 431.214 permit or require reduction
                       of the time frames within which advance notice must be provided.

                 2.    An MCC must notify an enrollee of its decision in response to a request by or on
                       behalf of an enrollee for prior authorization for medical or related services as set
                       out in 42 C.F.R. § 438.210(d).

                 3.    Written notice of delay of covered medical assistance must be provided to an
                       enrollee immediately upon an MCC’s receipt of information leading it to expect
                       that such delay will occur.

                 4.    Written notice of provider-initiated reduction, termination or suspension of
                       services must be provided to an enrollee in compliance with 42 C.F.R. §§
                       431.211, 431.213 and 431.214.

                 5.    Written notice is deemed to be provided to an enrollee upon deposit with the U.S.
                       Postal Service or other commercial mail carrier, or upon hand-delivery to an
                       enrollee or his/her representative.

           (c)   Notice Contents.

                 1.    Whenever this rule requires that a TennCare enrollee receive written notice of an
                       adverse benefit determination, the notice must be readable and must comply
                       with the requirements of 42 C.F.R. §§ 431.210 and 438.404.

                 2.    Remedying of Notice. If a notice of adverse benefit determination provided to an
                       enrollee does not meet the notice content requirements of Rule 1200-13-13-
                       .11(1)(c)1., TennCare or the MCC may cure any such deficiencies by providing



October, 2025 (Revised)                            86
TENNCARE MEDICAID                                                                    CHAPTER 1200-13-13

(Rule 1200-13-13-.11, continued)
                        one corrected notice to enrollees. If a corrected notice is provided to an enrollee,
                        the reviewing authority shall consider only the factual reasons and legal
                        authorities cited in the corrected notice, except that additional evidence beneficial
                        to the enrollee may be considered on appeal.

      (2)   Appeal Rights of Enrollees. Enrollees have the following rights:

            (a)   To appeal adverse benefit determinations.

            (b)   An enrollee’s request for appeal, including oral or written expressions by the enrollee,
                  or on his behalf, of dissatisfaction or disagreement with adverse benefit determinations
                  that have been made or are proposed to be made, may not be denied.

            (c)   To have the appeal rights that are prescribed by 42 C.F.R. Part 431, Subpart E and
                  Tennessee Code Annotated §§ 4-5-301, et seq.

            (d)   To be allowed sixty (60) days from the date on the written notice or, if no notice is
                  provided, from the time the enrollee becomes aware of an adverse benefit
                  determination, to appeal any adverse benefit determination. To file a Request for
                  Reimbursement for expenses incurred between the effective eligibility date and the
                  date that notice of eligibility is provided, the enrollee must request reimbursement and
                  provide complete information to TennCare, as prescribed by Rule .01, within sixty (60)
                  days from the date of the written notification of the effective eligibility date or, if no
                  written notice is provided, within sixty (60) days from the date the enrollee becomes
                  aware of the effective eligibility date. For all other Requests for Reimbursement, the
                  enrollee must request reimbursement and provide complete information, as prescribed
                  by Rule .01, within sixty (60) days from the date the enrollee paid out of pocket for
                  covered services.

            (e)   To appeal in person, by telephone, or in writing. Reasonable accommodations shall be
                  made for any person with disabilities who requires assistance with his/her appeal, such
                  as an appeal by TDD services or other communication device for people with
                  disabilities. Written requests for appeals made at county TDHS offices shall be
                  stamped and immediately forwarded to the TennCare Bureau for processing and entry
                  in the central registry.

            (f)   For ongoing services, have the right to continuation or reinstatement of services,
                  pursuant to 42 C.F.R. §§ 431.230 and 431.231 as modified by this rule, pending
                  resolution of the appeal when the enrollee submits a timely appeal and timely request
                  for COB. When an enrollee is so entitled to continuation or reinstatement of services,
                  this right may not be denied for any reason, including:

                  1.     An MCC’s failure to inform an enrollee of the availability of such continued
                         services;

                  2.     An MCC’s failure to reimburse providers for delivering services pending appeal;
                         or

                  3.     An MCC’s failure to provide such services when timely requested.

            (g)   To an appeals process. But for initial reconsideration by an MCC as permitted by this
                  rule, no person who is an employee, agent or representative of an MCC may
                  participate in deciding the outcome of a SFH. No state official who was directly involved
                  in the initial determination of the action in question may participate in deciding the
                  outcome of an enrollee’s appeal.




October, 2025 (Revised)                              87
TENNCARE MEDICAID                                                                  CHAPTER 1200-13-13

(Rule 1200-13-13-.11, continued)
      (3) Special Provisions Relating to Appeals.

           (a)   Individualized Decisions Required. Neither the TennCare program nor its MCCs may
                 employ utilization control guidelines or other quantitative coverage limits, whether
                 explicit or de facto, unless supported by an individualized determination of medical
                 necessity based upon the needs of each TennCare enrollee and his or her medical
                 history.

           (b)   Medical Evidence.

                 1.    Appeal decisions must be based on an evaluation of pertinent medical evidence.
                       TennCare and the MCCs shall elicit from enrollees and their treating providers all
                       pertinent medical records that support an appeal; and

                 2.    Medical opinions shall be evaluated pursuant to TennCare Medical Necessity
                       Rule 1200-13-16. Reliance upon insurance industry guidelines or utilization
                       control criteria of general application, without consideration of the individual
                       enrollee’s medical history, does not satisfy this requirement and cannot be relied
                       upon to support an adverse benefit determination.

           (c)   Record on Review. When TennCare receives an appeal from an enrollee regarding an
                 adverse benefit determination, TennCare is responsible for obtaining from the MCC
                 any and all records or documents pertaining to the MCC’s decision to take the
                 contested action. TennCare shall correct any violation of this rule that is evident from a
                 review of those records.

           (d)   Valid Factual Disputes. When TennCare receives an appeal from an enrollee,
                 TennCare will dismiss this appeal unless the enrollee has established a valid factual
                 dispute relating to an adverse benefit determination.

                 1.    Processing of Appeals. TennCare shall screen all appeals submitted by
                       TennCare enrollees to determine if the enrollees have presented a valid factual
                       dispute. If TennCare determines that an enrollee failed to present a valid factual
                       dispute, TennCare will immediately provide the enrollee with a notice, informing
                       him/her that the enrollee must provide additional information as identified in the
                       notice. If the enrollee does not provide this information, the appeal shall be
                       dismissed without the opportunity for a state fair hearing within ten (10) days of
                       the date of the notice. If the enrollee adequately responds to this notice,
                       TennCare shall inform the enrollee that the appeal will proceed to a hearing. If
                       the enrollee responds but fails to provide adequate information, TennCare will
                       provide a notice to the enrollee, informing him/her that the appeal is dismissed
                       without the opportunity for a state fair hearing. If the enrollee does not respond,
                       the appeal will be dismissed without the opportunity for a state fair hearing,
                       without further notice to the enrollee.

                 2.    Information Required to Establish Valid Factual Disputes. In order to establish a
                       valid factual dispute, TennCare enrollees must provide the following information:
                       Enrollee’s name; member SSN or TennCare ID#; address and phone;
                       identification of the service or item that is the subject of the adverse benefit
                       determination; and the reason for the appeal, including any factual error the
                       enrollee believes TennCare or the MCC has made. For reimbursement and
                       billing appeals, enrollees must also provide the date the service was provided,
                       the name of the provider, copies of receipts which prove that the enrollee paid for
                       the services or copies of a bill for the services, whichever is applicable.




October, 2025 (Revised)                             88
TENNCARE MEDICAID                                                                       CHAPTER 1200-13-13

(Rule 1200-13-13-.11, continued)
           (e)   Appeals When Enrollees Lack a Prescription. When a TennCare enrollee attempts to
                 lodge an appeal for a benefit for which the enrollee lacks a prescription, TennCare may
                 require the enrollee to exhaust the following administrative process before an appeal
                 can proceed:

                  1.    TennCare will provide appropriate notice to the enrollee informing him/her that
                        he/she will be required to complete an administrative process. Such
                        administrative process requires the enrollee to contact the MCC to make an
                        appointment with a provider to evaluate the request for the service. The MCC
                        shall be required to make such appointment for the enrollee within a 3-week
                        period or forty-eight (48) hours for urgent care from the date the enrollee
                        contacts the MCC. Appeal timeframes will be tolled during this administrative
                        process.

                  2.    In order for this appeal to continue, the enrollee shall be required to contact
                        TennCare after attending the appointment with a physician and demonstrate that
                        he/she remains without a prescription for the service. If the enrollee fails to
                        contact TennCare within sixty (60) days from the date of the notice described in
                        subparagraph (e)1., TennCare will dismiss the appeal without providing an
                        opportunity for a hearing for the enrollee.

            (f)   Appeals When No Adverse Benefit Determination Has Been Made. Enrollees shall not
                  possess the right to appeal when no adverse benefit determination has been made. If
                  enrollees request a hearing in this circumstance, their request shall be denied by the
                  TennCare bureau without the opportunity for a hearing. Such circumstances include
                  but are not limited to when enrollees appeal and no request for services had previously
                  been denied.

      (4)   Hearing Rights of Enrollees.

            (a)   TennCare shall inform enrollees of their state fair hearing rights;

            (b)   Enrollees shall be entitled to a hearing before a hearing officer that affords each
                  enrollee the right to:

                  1.    Representation at the hearing by anyone of his/her choice, including a lawyer;

                  2.    Review information and facts relied on for the decisions by the MCC and the
                        TennCare Bureau before the hearing;

                  3.    Cross-examine adverse witnesses;

                  4.    Present evidence, including the right to compel attendance of witnesses at
                        hearings;

                  5.    Review and present information from his/her medical records;

                  6.    Present evidence at the hearing challenging the adverse decision by his/her
                        MCC;

                  7.    Ask for an independent medical opinion, at no expense to the enrollee;

                  8.    Continue or reinstate ongoing services pending a hearing decision, as specified
                        in this rule;




October, 2025 (Revised)                             89
TENNCARE MEDICAID                                                                     CHAPTER 1200-13-13

(Rule 1200-13-13-.11, continued)
                 9.    A written decision setting out the hearing officer’s rulings on findings of fact and
                        conclusions of law; and

                  10.   Resolution, including a hearing before a hearing officer if the case has not been
                        previously resolved in favor of the enrollee, pursuant to 42 C.F.R. § 431.244.

            (c)   TennCare shall not impair the ability of an enrollee to appeal an adverse hearing
                  decision by requiring that the enrollee bear the expense of purchasing a hearing
                  transcript when such purchase would be a financial hardship for the enrollee.

            (d)   Parties to an Appeal. Under this rule, the parties to a state fair hearing are limited to the
                  enrollee and TennCare, permitted by federal regulations as modified by CMS letter
                  dated June 5, 2017. The purpose of the hearing is to focus on the enrollee’s medical
                  needs.

            (e)   Consistent with the Code of Judicial Conduct, hearing officers shall assist pro se
                  enrollees in developing the factual record and shall have authority to order second
                  medical opinions at no expense to the enrollee.

            (f)   Review of Hearing Decisions.

                  1.    Hearing officers shall promptly issue an Order of their decision. Any Order
                        delivered orally from the bench in an expedited hearing by a hearing officer shall
                        be effective immediately as to the provision or denial of benefits. In accordance
                        with 42 C.F.R. Part 431 Subpart E and 42 C.F.R. Part 438 Subpart F, the hearing
                        officer shall enter a written order as soon as practicable and shall provide the
                        parties with copies of such Orders. The time for appealing any oral Order shall
                        not begin to run until entry of the written Order.

                  2.    The TennCare Bureau shall have the opportunity to review all decisions of
                        hearing officers, in accordance with T.C.A. §§ 4-5-314 and 4-5-315, to determine
                        whether such decisions are contrary to applicable law, regulations or policy
                        interpretations, which shall include but not be limited to decisions regarding the
                        defined package of covered benefits, determinations of medical necessity and
                        decisions based on the application of this chapter and 42 C.F.R. Part 431
                        Subpart E and 42 C.F.R. Part 438 Subpart F.

                        (i)     If TennCare modifies or overturns the decision of the hearing officer,
                                TennCare shall issue a written decision that will be provided to the enrollee
                                and the hearing officer. TennCare’s decision shall constitute final agency
                                action.

                        (ii)    If TennCare does not modify or overturn the decision of the hearing officer,
                                the hearing officer’s decision shall constitute final agency action without
                                additional notice to the enrollee.

                        (iii)   Review of final agency action shall be available to enrollees pursuant to
                                T.C.A. § 4-5-322.

                        (iv)    A hearing officer’s decision in an enrollee’s appeal shall not be deemed
                                precedent for future appeals.

            (g)   Continuation or Reinstatement of TennCare Services.

                  1.    As permitted under 42 C.F.R. §§ 431.230, 431.231 and 438.420, if required or if
                        the enrollee requests, TennCare services shall continue or be reinstated until the



October, 2025 (Revised)                              90
TENNCARE MEDICAID                                                                   CHAPTER 1200-13-13

(Rule 1200-13-13-.11, continued)
                        earlier of dismissal of the appeal through the valid factual dispute process,
                        enrollee’s withdrawal of the appeal, or an initial hearing decision adverse to the
                        enrollee.

                  2.    In the case of a timely request for continuation or reinstatement of the TennCare
                        services described in paragraph (4)(g)1. above, the services shall continue or be
                        reinstated only if and to the extent prescribed by the enrollee’s treating clinician.

                  3.    Notwithstanding the requirements of this part, TennCare enrollees are not
                        entitled to continuation or reinstatement of services pending an appeal related to
                        the following:

                        (i)     When a service is denied because the enrollee has exceeded the benefit
                                limit applicable to that service;

                        (ii)    When a request for prior authorization is denied for a prescription drug,
                                with the exception of:

                                (I)    Pharmacists shall provide a single 72-hour interim supply in
                                       emergency situations for the non-authorized drug, unless such
                                       supply would exceed applicable pharmacy benefit limits; or

                                (II)   When the drug has been prescribed on an ongoing basis or with
                                       unlimited refills and becomes subject to prior authorization
                                       requirements.

                        (iii)   When coverage of a prescription drug or service is denied because the
                                requested drug or service is not a category or class of drugs or services
                                covered by TennCare;

                        (iv)    When coverage for a prescription drug is denied because the enrollee has
                                been locked into one pharmacy and the enrollee seeks to fill a prescription
                                at another pharmacy;

                        (v)     When a request for reimbursement is denied and the enrollee appeals this
                                denial;

                        (vi)    When a physician has failed to prescribe or order the service or level of
                                service for which continuation or reinstatement is requested; or

                        (vii)   If TennCare had not paid for the type and amount of service for which
                                continuation or reinstatement is requested prior to the appeal.

            (h)   Reserved.

      (5)   Reserved.

      (6)   Release of Enrollees’ Medical Records.

            (a)   When a request is made, by or on behalf of a TennCare enrollee, for approval of a
                  TennCare service or for an appeal of an adverse benefit determination, the enrollee is
                  deemed to have consented to release of his/her relevant medical records to his/her
                  MCC and the TennCare Bureau for the purposes of acting upon the enrollee’s request.

            (b)   Providers shall promptly provide copies of an enrollee’s medical records to the
                  enrollee’s MCC(s) and to the TennCare Bureau upon being informed by the MCC(s) or



October, 2025 (Revised)                              91
TENNCARE MEDICAID                                                                    CHAPTER 1200-13-13

(Rule 1200-13-13-.11, continued)
                 TennCare Bureau that the records have been requested for the purpose of acting upon
                 an enrollee’s request for approval of a TennCare service or an enrollee’s appeal of an
                 adverse benefit determination.

            (c)   An enrollee’s consent to release of his/her medical records may be evidenced by his
                  signature (or his provider’s or authorized representative’s signature) upon the
                  enrollee’s initial application for TennCare, upon his TennCare appeal form or other
                  written request for authorization or appeal, or, in the event of an appeal by telephone,
                  by a TennCare Bureau employee’s signing of an appeal form on behalf of an enrollee
                  with documentation of consent to do so.

            (d)   The medical records obtained by MCCs and the TennCare Bureau under this rule
                  remain confidential. MCCs and the TennCare Bureau may use and disclose the
                  records only as necessary in their consideration of the enrollee’s request for approval
                  of a TennCare service or the enrollee’s appeal of an adverse benefit determination.

      (7)   Time Requirements.

            (a)   MCCs must act upon a request for prior authorization as provided in 42 C.F.R. §
                  438.210.

            (b)   MCCs must complete reconsideration of standard appeals within fourteen (14)
                  calendar days of the request from TennCare. MCCs must complete reconsideration of
                  expedited appeals within seventy-two (72) hours of the request for SFH.

            (c)   All standard and expedited appeals not previously resolved in favor of the enrollee
                  during reconsideration, shall be set for hearing before a hearing officer, and shall be
                  resolved pursuant to the timeframes set forth in 42 C.F.R. § 431.244. In accordance
                  with 42 C.F.R. § 438.410(a) and 42 C.F.R. § 431.244(f)(2), SFH requests which are
                  approved for expedited resolution and which are not resolved in the enrollee’s favor
                  during MCC’s reconsideration, shall be resolved by TennCare within three (3) working
                  days from the date of the MCC’s reconsideration determination. TennCare is not
                  charged with any delays attributable to the enrollee.

            (d)   In no circumstance will a directive be issued by the TennCare Bureau or a hearing
                  officer to provide a service to an enrollee if, when the appeal is resolved, the service is
                  no longer covered by TennCare for the enrollee. A directive also will not be issued by
                  the TennCare Bureau if the service cannot reasonably be provided to the enrollee
                  before the date when the service is no longer covered by TennCare for the enrollee.

      (8)   Reserved.

      (9)   Special Provisions Relating to Children in State Custody. Children in the custody of the State
            have the rights and protections established by 42 C.F.R. Part 431, Subpart E regarding
            TennCare services and benefits.

Authority: T.C.A. §§ 4-5-202, 4-5-208, 71-5-105, 71-5-109, and 71-5-113; 42 C.F.R. Part 431 Subpart E;
42 C.F.R. Part 438 Subpart F; and Executive Order No. 23. Administrative History: Public necessity
rule filed July 1, 2002; effective through December 13, 2002. Original rule filed September 30, 2002; to be
effective December 14, 2002; however, on December 9, 2002, the House Government Operations
Committee of the General Assembly stayed Rule 1200-13-13-.11; new effective date February 12, 2003.
Emergency rule filed December 13, 2002; effective through May 27, 2003. Public necessity rule filed May
5, 2005; effective through October 17, 2005. Public necessity rule filed July 29, 2005; effective through
January 10, 2006. Amendments filed July 28, 2005; effective October 11, 2005. Public necessity rule filed
December 29, 2005; expired June 12, 2006. On June 13, 2006, affected rules reverted to status on
December 28, 2005. Amendments filed October 27, 2005; effective January 10, 2006. However, Notice of



October, 2025 (Revised)                             92
TENNCARE MEDICAID                                                                    CHAPTER 1200-13-13

(Rule 1200-13-13-.11, continued)
Withdrawal of permanent rule amendments (1)(d)3., (1)(d)4., (4)(g)6., (5)(a)5., (5)(e), (5)(f), and (7)(h)
filed and effective January 6, 2006 (to have been effective January 10, 2006). Public necessity rule filed
May 17, 2006; effective through October 29, 2006. Amendments filed March 31, 2006; effective June 14,
2006. Amendment filed August 14, 2006; effective October 28, 2006. Public necessity rule filed
December 1, 2006; effective through May 15, 2007. Amendment filed March 1, 2007; effective May 15,
2007. Amendment filed August 19, 2008; effective November 2, 2008. Amendment filed September 30,
2009; effective December 29, 2009. Amendment filed October 26, 2010; effective January 24, 2011.
Emergency rule filed July 1, 2011; effective through December 28, 2011. Amendment filed September 23,
2011; effective December 22, 2011. Amendments filed September 27, 2013; effective December 26,
2013. Amendments filed September 25, 2017; effective December 24, 2017. Amendments filed July 8,
2021; effective October 6, 2021.

1200-13-13-.12 OTHER APPEALS BY TENNCARE APPLICANTS AND ENROLLEES.

Notwithstanding Rule 1200-13-19-.01, or any rule to the contrary, appeals by applicants and enrollees of
all non-medical eligibility matters are removed to Rule Chapter 1200-13-19, effective upon expiration of
the TDHS contract to determine eligibility matters.

Authority: T.C.A. §§ 4-5-202, 4-5-209, 71-5-105, 71-5-109, and 71-5-113; 42 C.F.R. Part 431 Subpart E;
42 C.F.R. Part 438 Subpart F; and Executive Order No. 23. Administrative History: Original rule filed
September 30, 2002; to be effective December 14, 2002; however, on December 9, 2002, the House
Government Operations Committee of the General Assembly stayed Rule 1200-13-13-.12; new effective
date February 12, 2003. Emergency rule filed December 13, 2002; effective through May 27, 2003. Public
necessity rule filed June 8, 2005; effective through November 20, 2005. Amendment to public necessity
rule filed July 6, 2005; effective through November 20, 2005. Amendment filed September 6, 2005;
effective November 20, 2005. Amendments filed September 25, 2017; effective December 24, 2017.

1200-13-13-.13    MEMBER ABUSE OR OVERUTILIZATION OF THE TENNCARE PHARMACY
PROGRAM.

      (1)   The Bureau is authorized to implement and maintain a Pharmacy Lock-in Program designed
            to address member Abuse or Overutilization. Activities which may indicate Abuse or
            Overutilization justifying placement on Lock-in Status or Prior Authorization Status (PA
            Status) include, but are not limited to, the following:

            (a)   Forging or altering a prescription for drugs.

            (b)   Selling TennCare paid prescription drugs.

            (c)   Visiting multiple prescribers or pharmacies to obtain controlled substances.

            (d)   Trading, swapping or selling a TennCare card.

            (e)   Failing to promptly report the loss or theft of a TennCare card.

            (f)   Forging or altering a TennCare card.

            (g)   Knowingly providing false, incomplete, inaccurate or erroneous information to
                  provider(s) in order to receive covered services for which the member is ineligible.

            (h)   Permitting the use of a TennCare card by anyone other than the member to whom the
                  card is assigned in order to receive or attempt to receive services.

      (2)   The TennCare Pharmacy Lock-in Program shall be administered by the Bureau. Monitoring
            of enrollee activities listed in Paragraph (1) shall be conducted by the Bureau, the MCCs,
            including the PBM, and the Tennessee Office of Inspector General (OIG). When an enrollee



October, 2025 (Revised)                              93
TENNCARE MEDICAID                                                                    CHAPTER 1200-13-13

(Rule 1200-13-13-.13, continued)
           has been identified as having participated in any Abuse or Overutilization activities, including,
           but not limited to, the activities listed in Paragraph (1), the enrollee’s name shall be referred
           to the Bureau as appropriate for the Pharmacy Lock-in Program as follows:

            (a)   Any enrollee who has been identified by the OIG as having been convicted of
                  TennCare Fraud or a drug-related offense.

            (b)   Any enrollee who has been arrested for or charged with TennCare Fraud.

            (c)   Any enrollee who has been arrested for or charged with a drug-related offense.

            (d)   Any enrollee who has obtained multiple controlled substance prescriptions over a
                  ninety (90) day period when the prescriptions were filled by three (3) or more different
                  pharmacies and written by three (3) or more different prescribers.

      (3)   Pharmacy Lock-in Program procedures shall include:

            (a)   A determination to place an enrollee who has been referred as appropriate for the
                  Pharmacy Lock-in Program on Lock-in Status shall be made by the TennCare
                  Pharmacy Director or designee after the enrollee’s relevant pharmacy claims data has
                  been reviewed by clinical staff.

            (b)   Any enrollee determined to be appropriate for the Pharmacy Lock-in Program shall be
                  notified by the Bureau or the MCC prior to the imposition of Lock-in Status. The notice
                  shall include a brief explanation of the Pharmacy Lock-in Program, the reason for the
                  determination to place the enrollee on Lock-in Status, the date the Lock-in Status will
                  become effective, and the information necessary for the enrollee to appeal the decision
                  of the Bureau, pursuant to Rule 1200-13-13-.11. If the enrollee has an authorized
                  representative on file on their profile, the notice shall be sent to the enrollee’s
                  authorized representative.

            (c)   If an enrollee fails to appeal placement in the Pharmacy Lock-in Program or an appeal
                  is not resolved in his favor, the enrollee will be provided TennCare pharmacy services
                  only at the Lock-in Provider to which the enrollee is assigned.

            (d)   Any enrollee who has a diagnosis of malignant neoplasm or sickle cell disease (or
                  sickle cell related disorders outlined in Subpart (iv) of Part 12. of Subparagraph (c) of
                  Paragraph (1) of this rule) shall not be placed in the Pharmacy Lock-in Program. Any
                  enrollee currently in the Pharmacy Lock-in Program shall be removed from the
                  Pharmacy Lock-in Program if the enrollee’s medical records indicate one of these
                  diagnoses. However, this exception shall not apply if the enrollee has been arrested
                  for, charged with, or convicted of an activity outlined in Paragraph (1) of this rule (1200-
                  13-13-.13(1)), or been convicted of TennCare Fraud.

      (4)   Lock-in Provider selection. A pharmacy will qualify for and may be selected by the enrollee as
            a Lock-in Provider only if it meets all the following criteria:

            (a)   It is enrolled in the TennCare Pharmacy Network;

            (b)   It is within the State of Tennessee;

            (c)   It is a full-service pharmacy that carries all medications normally carried by
                  pharmacies;

            (d)   It is not a mail order or specialty pharmacy;




October, 2025 (Revised)                              94
TENNCARE MEDICAID                                                                  CHAPTER 1200-13-13

(Rule 1200-13-13-.13, continued)
           (e)   It is not a Targeted Pharmacy;

           (f)   It is a single pharmacy location at a specific address. A chain pharmacy may be
                 selected but only the specific named location may be used, not multiple locations or
                 outlets of the chain; and

           (g)   It is in proximity to the enrollee’s residence, which must be the current address on file
                 with the Bureau. If no pharmacy is available within fifteen (15) miles of the enrollee’s
                 residence, reasonable efforts shall be made to use the nearest qualifying pharmacy.

     (5)   After twelve (12) months a member may request a change of Lock-in Provider once each
           year. Additional changes are limited to the following reasons:

           (a)   The member has moved and his new address is at least fifteen (15) miles from the
                 lock-in pharmacy and he has updated his address with the Bureau.

           (b)   The member’s lock-in pharmacy has permanently closed.

           (c)   The member’s lock-in pharmacy has voluntarily dismissed the enrollee from its practice
                 and has notified the Bureau and the PBM.

           (d)   The Bureau may, at its sole discretion, determine that there is a compelling need to
                 change the member’s lock-in pharmacy.

     (6)   Review of Lock-in Status. The Bureau or the MCC shall periodically review the claims
           information of members on Lock-in Status to determine the need for continued lock-in or
           escalation to Prior Authorization Status. This review shall occur at least one time annually.

           (a)   Lock-in Status will be discontinued if the Bureau determines that a member has met all
                 of the following criteria for at least six (6) consecutive months:

                 1.    Has not received any opioid medications while on buprenorphine-containing
                       products for addiction, unless it is established that opioid use was/is appropriate
                       according to the enrollee’s provider of addiction therapy.

                 2.    Has received TennCare reimbursed controlled substance prescriptions from only
                       one (1) provider, except under the following:

                       (i)     If the enrollee is under the care of two (2) providers, and claims data
                               shows consistent, appropriate use of controlled substances within
                               standards of care from both providers, an exception may be made if both
                               providers acknowledge in writing that they are aware of the other provider’s
                               care and prescribing and agree that the enrollee is being treated
                               appropriately within standards of care.

                       (ii)    Enrollees with claims from multiple providers all in the same practice or in
                               different locations within the same practice will be considered to have used
                               one (1) provider.

                       (iii)   Enrollees with claims from multiple BESMART providers will be considered
                               to have used one (1) provider.

                 3.    Has received TennCare reimbursed prescriptions from only one (1) pharmacy.
                       However, if the enrollee has changed his or her pharmacy by requesting a Lock-
                       in Provider change that was approved by the Bureau during the review period, an




October, 2025 (Revised)                             95
TENNCARE MEDICAID                                                                  CHAPTER 1200-13-13

(Rule 1200-13-13-.13, continued)
                        exception may be made to consider the enrollee as having used one (1)
                        pharmacy.

           (b)   If a member is removed from Lock-in Status, the Bureau or the MCC will monitor the
                 member for changes in utilization patterns and return him to Lock-in Status if
                 appropriate under Paragraphs (1)-(3).

     (7)   Prior Authorization Status (PA Status).

           (a)   A member against whom criminal process alleging TennCare Fraud has been issued or
                 who has been convicted of TennCare Fraud shall automatically be placed on PA
                 Status.

           (b)   Lock-in Status shall be escalated to PA Status if a member on Lock-in Status meets
                 three (3) of the following criteria over a 90 day period:

                 1.    Has filled prescriptions for controlled substances at three (3) or more
                       pharmacies. However, if the enrollee has changed his or her pharmacy by
                       requesting a Lock-in Provider change that was approved by the Bureau during
                       the review period, an exception may be made to consider the enrollee as having
                       used one (1) pharmacy.

                 2.    Has received controlled substance prescriptions from three (3) or more
                       prescribers, except under the following:

                       (i)     If the enrollee is under the care of two (2) providers, and claims data
                               shows consistent, appropriate use of controlled substances within
                               standards of care from both providers, an exception may be made if both
                               providers acknowledge in writing that they are aware of the other provider’s
                               care and prescribing and agree that the enrollee is being treated
                               appropriately within standards of care.

                       (ii)    Enrollees with claims from multiple providers all in the same practice or in
                               different locations within the same practice will be considered to have used
                               one (1) provider.

                       (iii)   Enrollees with claims from multiple BESMART providers will be considered
                               to have used one (1) provider.

                 3.    Has received an opioid prescription while receiving buprenorphine-containing
                       products for addiction, unless it is established that opioid use was/is appropriate
                       according to the enrollee’s provider of addiction therapy.

           (c)   A member who has been treated in a hospital emergency department for an overdose
                 of an illicit controlled substance, as identified in the most recently available TennCare
                 diagnosis data, shall automatically be placed on PA Status.

     (8)   Review of Prior Authorization Status (PA Status). The Bureau or the MCC shall periodically
           review the claims information of members on PA Status to determine the need for continued
           PA Status.

           (a)   PA Status for enrollees will be discontinued if TennCare determines that a member has
                 met all of the following criteria for at least six (6) consecutive months:




October, 2025 (Revised)                              96
TENNCARE MEDICAID                                                                      CHAPTER 1200-13-13

(Rule 1200-13-13-.13, continued)
                 1.    Has not received any opioid medications while on buprenorphine-containing
                        products for addiction, unless it is established that opioid use was/is appropriate
                        according to the enrollee’s provider of addiction therapy.

                  2.    Has received TennCare reimbursed controlled substance prescriptions from only
                        one (1) provider, except under the following:

                        (i)     If the enrollee is under the care of two (2) providers, and claims data
                                shows consistent, appropriate use of controlled substances within
                                standards of care from both providers, an exception may be made if both
                                providers acknowledge in writing that they are aware of the other provider’s
                                care and prescribing and agree that the enrollee is being treated
                                appropriately within standards of care.

                        (ii)    Enrollees with claims from multiple providers all in the same practice or in
                                different locations within the same practice will be considered to have used
                                one (1) provider.

                        (iii)   Enrollees with claims from multiple BESMART providers will be considered
                                to have used one (1) provider.

                  3.    Has received TennCare reimbursed prescriptions from only one (1) pharmacy.
                        However, if the enrollee has changed his or her pharmacy by requesting a Lock-
                        in Provider change that was approved by the Bureau during the review period, an
                        exception may be made to consider the enrollee as having used one (1)
                        pharmacy.

            (b)   Enrollees removed from PA Status remain in the Pharmacy Lock-in Program and are
                  required to qualify for removal from the Pharmacy Lock-in Program after a re-review of
                  their prescription claims as described in Paragraph (6) of this rule. If an enrollee is
                  removed from PA Status, TennCare or the MCC will monitor the enrollee for changes in
                  utilization patterns and return the enrollee to PA Status if appropriate under Paragraph
                  (7).

            (c)   Enrollees who are not eligible for review of PA Status:

                  1.    When the Bureau has been notified by OIG that an enrollee has been identified
                        as having participated in any Abuse or Overutilization activities, including but not
                        limited to the activities listed in Paragraph (1) of this rule, then that enrollee is not
                        eligible for review of PA Status.

                  2.    An enrollee who has been convicted of TennCare Fraud is not eligible for review
                        of PA Status.

                  3.    If an enrollee was charged or arrested for TennCare Fraud, the enrollee is not
                        eligible for PA Status review pending the final resolution of the charge or
                        allegation. If the enrollee’s TennCare Fraud charges are dismissed or if the
                        enrollee is otherwise not convicted of TennCare Fraud and that TennCare Fraud
                        charge was the sole basis for the enrollee’s Lock-in Status, all Pharmacy Lock-in
                        Program and PA Status edits will be terminated on the day that the TennCare
                        Fraud charge was closed.

      (9)   Emergency pharmacy services may be obtained with a TennCare or MCC override of a
            member’s Lock-in Status. The PBM has clinical staff available at all times to respond to
            emergency situations. The PBM must verify that a genuine emergency exists, such as
            documented proof from the lock-in pharmacy that it is temporarily out of stock of a needed



October, 2025 (Revised)                              97
TENNCARE MEDICAID                                                                 CHAPTER 1200-13-13

(Rule 1200-13-13-.13, continued)
           medication. A lock-in override will not be provided simply because a pharmacy is closed for
           the day unless a true medical emergency exists.

Authority: T.C.A. §§ 4-3-1013, 4-5-202, 4-5-203, 71-5-105, 71-5-109, 71-5-146, 71-5-197, and 71-5-198
and Executive Order No. 23. Administrative History: Original rule filed September 30, 2002; to be
effective December 14, 2002; however, on December 9, 2002, the House Government Operations
Committee of the General Assembly stayed Rule 1200-13-13-.13; new effective date February 12, 2003.
Emergency rule filed December 13, 2002; effective through May 27, 2003. Public necessity rule filed
December 29, 2005; expired June 12, 2006. On June 13, 2006, affected rules reverted to status on
December 28, 2005. Repeal and new rule filed March 31, 2006; effective June 14, 2006. Amendment
filed October 3, 2013; effective January 1, 2014. Amendments filed December 29, 2015; effective March
28, 2016. Amendments filed September 11, 2024; effective December 10, 2024.

1200-13-13-.14 REPEALED.

Authority: T.C.A. §§ 4-5-202, 71-5-105, and 71-5-109 and Executive Order No. 23. Administrative
History: Original rule filed September 30, 2002; to be effective December 14, 2002; however, on
December 9, 2002, the House Government Operations Committee of the General Assembly stayed Rule
1200-13-13-.14; new effective date February 12, 2003. Emergency rule filed December 13, 2002;
effective through May 27, 2003. Public necessity rule (repeal) filed August 18, 2005; effective through
January 30, 2006. Repeal filed November 15, 2005; effective January 29, 2006.

1200-13-13-.15 BESMART. This rule supersedes any other rules related to the use of buprenorphine
products for treatment of opioid use disorder (OUD) in office based opioid treatment (OBOT) or an opioid
treatment program (OTP) by a treating provider participating in an MCO’s network of BESMART
providers.

      (1)   BESMART treatment is a component of covered outpatient substance abuse benefits and
            consists of a set of coordinated medically necessary covered services which includes:

            (a)   Psychosocial assessment and development of a treatment plan;

            (b)   Individual or group counseling;

            (c)   Peer recovery services;

            (d)   Care coordination;

            (e)   Opioid-agonist therapy consisting of buprenorphine products that have been FDA
                  approved for OUD treatment and may be prescribed in excess of the limits described in
                  rules .04 and .10, when determined to be medically necessary by a treating provider in
                  an MCO’s network of BESMART providers and under the participant’s plan of care.

                  1.    Except as otherwise provided for in this rule, participants may receive up to
                        sixteen (16) mg of buprenorphine containing products daily; however, providers
                        shall initiate and lead a discussion regarding a participant’s readiness to taper
                        down or off treatment at any time upon a participant’s request, but no later than
                        one (1) year after initiating treatment and every six (6) months thereafter.

                  2.    Under the best practices for treatment of OUD, the BESMART provider shall
                        utilize the lowest effective dose of Medication-Assisted Treatment (MAT).

                  3.    The following adult populations shall be eligible to receive a maximum daily
                        dosage of twenty-four (24) mg of buprenorphine, not to exceed one (1) year in
                        duration:




October, 2025 (Revised)                             98
TENNCARE MEDICAID                                                                    CHAPTER 1200-13-13

(Rule 1200-13-13-.15, continued)
                       (i)   Pregnant participants confirmed by provider attestation.

                        (ii)    Postpartum participants for a period of twelve (12) months from delivery
                                date as shown by medical records or insurance claim.

                        (iii)   Recent intravenous (IV) drug users confirmed by prescriber attestation and
                                a positive urine drug screen.

                        (iv)    Current users receiving greater than fifty (50) mg of methadone for OUD
                                treatment transitioning to buprenorphine agonist therapy demonstrated by
                                paid claims data from the participant’s health insurer, provider attestation,
                                or medical records.

                        (v)     Current users of sixteen (16) mg to twenty-four (24) mg per day of
                                buprenorphine demonstrated by paid claims data from the participant’s
                                previous health insurer.

                        (vi)    For one (1) year from the effective date of this rule, a member who does
                                not qualify under the criteria of this part but receives greater than sixteen
                                (16) mg per day of buprenorphine as demonstrated by the controlled
                                substance monitoring database shall be eligible to receive a maximum
                                daily dose of twenty-four (24) mg.

      (2)   BESMART treatment requires medical office visits at least weekly for participants in the
            induction and stabilization phase of treatment; at least every two (2) to four (4) weeks for
            participants in the maintenance phase of treatment; and at least every two (2) months for
            participants who have been in the maintenance phase of treatment for one (1) year or longer.

      (3)   To be reimbursed for a BESMART covered service, treating providers must demonstrate an
            ability to provide all BESMART services in a coordinated, person-centric way, including the
            ability to facilitate access to all related treatment modalities and provider types, and must
            participate in at least one (1) MCO’s network of BESMART providers.

      (4)   Prescriptions of buprenorphine containing products to TennCare enrollees by nurse
            practitioners and physician assistants for the treatment of OUD will not be reimbursed unless
            the nurse practitioner or physician assistant participates in at least one (1) MCO’s network of
            BESMART providers.

Authority: T.C.A. §§ 4-5-202, 4-5-208, 71-5-105, 71-5-107, and 71-5-109. Administrative History:
Emergency rules filed April 15, 2021; effective through October 12, 2021. New rule filed June 29, 2021;
effective September 27, 2021.




October, 2025 (Revised)                              99

