Source URL: https://downloads.cms.gov/cmsgov/archived-downloads/MedicaidGenInfo/downloads/TN-10-006-Att.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-09-23

Revision: HCFA-PM-95-3       (MB)                                                  Attachment 4.17-A
       MAY 1995                                                                    Page 1

                   STATE PLAN UNDER TITLE XIX OF THE SOCIAL SECURITY ACT

                                        State/Territory: Tennessee

                             LIENS AND ADJUSTMENTS OR RECOVERIES


1. The State uses the following process for determining that an institutionalized individual cannot
   reasonably be expected to be discharged from the medical institution and return home:

   A determination that an individual cannot reasonably be expected to be discharged to return home
   shall be made in accordance with the following process.

   First, the PreAdmission Evaluation (PAE) for level of care which is certified by the physician shall
   specify whether discharge is expected and the anticipated length of stay in the institution. The
   following shall be deemed sufficient evidence that a person cannot reasonably be expected to return
   home and is thus permanently institutionalized:

   (1) An approved PAE, certified by the physician indicating that discharge is not expected, or

   (2) The continued stay of a resident of a medical institution at the end of a temporary stay predicted
       by his physician at the time of admission to be no longer than six months in duration.

   Written notice of the determination that the individual residing in a medical institution cannot
   reasonably be expected to be discharged to return home shall be issued to the individual or his
   designated correspondent. The notice shall explain the right to request a reconsideration review.
   Such request must be submitted in writing to the Bureau of TennCare, Long Term Care Division, within
   30 days of receipt of the written notice. The reconsideration review shall be a Commissioner’s
   Administrative Hearing.

2. The following criteria are used for establishing that a permanently institutionalized individual's son or
   daughter provided care as specified under regulations at 42 CFR §433.36(f):

   Not applicable. Tennessee does not apply TEFRA liens.


3. The State defines the terms below as follows:

  o estate

   The term “Estate” includes all property and other assets, including real property, owned by the
   individual at the moment immediately preceding death and as limited or expanded by T.C.A. Titles 30,
   31, and 32 and by the Courts of the State of Tennessee.

  o individual’s home

   For the purposes of this section (Attachment 4.17A) and subject to State probate law, this term is
   defined as the place where one dwells; a settled abode where a person lives and to which, whenever
   he is absent, he has the intention of returning.

  o equity interest in the home


TN No. 10-006
Supersedes                        Approval Date: 03-16-11                   Effective Date 10/01/10
TN No. NEW
Revision: HCFA-PM-95-3        (MB)                                               Attachment 4.17-A
       MAY 1995                                                                  Page 2

                   STATE PLAN UNDER TITLE XIX OF THE SOCIAL SECURITY ACT

                                          State/Territory: Tennessee

                              LIENS AND ADJUSTMENTS OR RECOVERIES

  o residing in the home for at least one or two years on a continuous basis,
    and

  For the purposes of this section (Attachment 4.17A) and subject to State probate law, this term is
  defined as dwelling permanently or continuously in a home (as that term is defined above) for the
  applicable period. Unexplained absence or absence from the home for a continuous period of thirty
  (30) days or more creates a rebuttable presumption of abandonment.

  o lawfully residing.

  For the purposes of this section (Attachment 4.17A) and subject to State probate law, this term is
  defined as dwelling permanently or continuously with the consent of the person(s) who has beneficial
  ownership and the right to present use and enjoyment of the premises and not subject to an order to
  vacate the premises by a court of competent jurisdiction.

4. The State defines undue hardship as follows:

  “Undue hardship” is constituted to be any of the following three circumstances:

  (1)   The property of the estate subject to recovery is the sole income-producing asset of survivors,
        such as a family farm or other family business. There is no value limitation on the sole income-
        producing asset.

  (2)   A sibling of the individual meets all of the following criteria:

        (a)     He was lawfully residing in the individual’s home for a period of one year immediately
                before the individual’s admission to the medical institution;

        (b)     He provided care to such individual for that one year, which permitted the individual to
                reside at home rather than in an institution; and

        (c)     He has lawfully resided in such home on a continuous basis since the date of the
                individual’s admission to the medical institution.

        The undue hardship shall be considered to no longer exist when such person no longer resides
        in such home.

  (3)   A child of the individual meets all of the following criteria:

        (a)     He was lawfully residing in the individual’s home for a period of two years immediately
                before the individual’s admission to the medical institution;

        (b)     He provided care to such individual for those two years, which permitted the individual to
                reside at home rather than in an institution; and

        (c)     He has lawfully resided in such home on a continuous basis since the date of the
                individual’s admission to the medical institution.



TN No. 10-006
Supersedes                        Approval Date: 03-16-11                   Effective Date 10/01/10
TN No. NEW
Revision: HCFA-PM-95-3       (MB)                                                  Attachment 4.17-A
       MAY 1995                                                                    Page 3

                   STATE PLAN UNDER TITLE XIX OF THE SOCIAL SECURITY ACT

                                        State/Territory: Tennessee

                             LIENS AND ADJUSTMENTS OR RECOVERIES

         The undue hardship shall be considered to no longer exist when such person no longer resides in
         such home.

5. The following standards and procedures are used by the State for waiving estate recoveries when
   recovery would cause an undue hardship, and when recovery is not cost-effective:

   Pursuant to T.C.A. § 20-13-103, the State Agency submits a request for approval of a compromise or
   settlement such as a waiver of an estate recovery claim (complete or partial). This request is
   submitted to the Attorney General, Comptroller, and Governor for their approval. If the request is
   denied, the requesting party may move the Probate Court for an order to waive (either completely or
   partially) or defer recovery. T.C.A. § 71-5-116.

6. The State defines cost-effective as follows (include methodology/thresholds used to determine cost-
   effectiveness):

   Collection of any estate recovery claim is presumed to be cost-effective. Estate recovery claims are
   pursued through the Probate Court and are classified as third priority claims. After payment of the first
   priority claims (administrative costs) and second priority claims (funeral expenses), TennCare receives
   the balance of the value of the estate recovery claim. Any remaining value of the estate after payment
   of the estate recovery claim is then disbursed in accordance with Tennessee probate law.

7. The State uses the following collection procedures (include specific elements contained in the advance
   notice requirement, the method for applying for a waiver, hearing and appeals procedures, and time
   frames involved):

   The State uses the following collection procedures:

   (1) Pursuant to T.C.A. § 71-5-116(c)(2), personal representatives of decedents who were TennCare
       enrollees must obtain a release of TennCare’s claim against the estate before they can disburse
       funds or assets from the estate, other than funds for administrative costs or funeral expenses.

   (2)   Personal representatives must file a “Request for Release” (RFR) with TennCare.

   (3)   Upon receipt of the RFR, the State provides to the personal representative in writing an affidavit
         setting out the amount to which it is entitled under law for estate recovery. Upon receipt of notice
         of the opening of a Probate estate, the State files with the Probate Court a claim as required by
         Tennessee probate law. The clerk of court is under a duty to send a copy of the claim to the
         personal representative. Recovery of such amount goes forward in accordance with the
         Tennessee Probate Code, to which reference is made in the response to Item #3 above; T.C.A.
         § 71-5-101, et seq.; and all other applicable Tennessee Code sections and judicial decisions
         related to probate matters. An estate recovery claim has third priority status, following only
         administrative costs and funeral expenses. General creditor claims have a lower priority status
         than estate recovery claims. [See, T.C.A. § 30-2-317.] The State receives payments on claims
         by lump sum and in the normal course of probate proceedings. Accordingly, there are no
         administrative procedures for payment schedules or payment delays.



TN No. 10-006
Supersedes                        Approval Date: 03-16-11                   Effective Date 10/01/10
TN No. NEW
Revision: HCFA-PM-95-3      (MB)                                                  Attachment 4.17-A
       MAY 1995                                                                   Page 4

                  STATE PLAN UNDER TITLE XIX OF THE SOCIAL SECURITY ACT

                                       State/Territory: Tennessee

                            LIENS AND ADJUSTMENTS OR RECOVERIES


  (4)   Statutory bases for a waiver of estate recovery are described in the RFR, and appropriate
        documentation for the waiver is identified in and is required to be submitted with the RFR.

  (5)   Application for waiver on the basis of undue hardship is fully described in the response to Item #5
        above.




TN No. 10-006
Supersedes                      Approval Date:03-16-11                    Effective Date 10/01/10
TN No. NEW

