Source URL: https://fhb.hhs.texas.gov/handbooks/medicaid-elderly-people-disabilities-handbook/d-7800-medicaid-estate-recovery-program
Retrieved: 2026-09-23

D-7800, Medicaid Estate Recovery Program | Forms and Handbooks 

 Skip to main content

 Skip to left sidebar content

 This is the new HHS Forms and Handbooks website. Please update your bookmarks.

 An official State of Texas website. 

 HHS Providers Home 

 Forms and Handbooks 

 Search Forms and Handbooks

 Menu 

 Close 

 Forms

 Handbooks

 Advance Directives

 Home 

 Handbooks 

 Medicaid for the Elderly and People with Disabilities Handbook 

 D-7800, Medicaid Estate Recovery Program

 Book navigation 

 Medicaid for the Elderly and People with Disabilities Handbook 
 Expand Medicaid for the Elderly and People with Disabilities Handbook Menu 

 Search this Handbook 

 Chapter A, General Information and MEPD Groups 

 Chapter B, Applications and Redeterminations 

 Chapter C, Rights and Responsibilities 

 Chapter D, Non-Financial 
 Expand Chapter D, Non-Financial Menu 

 D-1000, Aged, Blind or Disabled 

 D-2000, Determining Blindness or Disability 

 D-3000, Residence 

 D-4000, Fiduciary Agents and Living Arrangement 

 D-5000, Citizenship and Identity 

 D-6000, Social Security Number 

 D-7000, Third-Party Resources 
 Expand D-7000, Third-Party Resources Menu 

 D-7100, Reserved for Future Use 

 D-7200, Cooperation and Assignment of Rights for Medicaid Eligibility 

 D-7300, Potential Sources of Third-Party Coverage 

 D-7400, Use of Third-Party Resources 

 D-7500, Third-Party Resources for SSI Recipients 

 D-7600, Long-Term Care Insurance Policies 

 D-7700, Health Insurance Premium Payment Reimbursement Program 

 D-7800, Medicaid Estate Recovery Program 

 D-8000, Alien Status 

 D-9000, Alien Sponsorship 

 Chapter E, General Income 

 Chapter F, Resources 

 Chapter G, Eligibility Budgets 

 Chapter H, Co-Payment 

 Chapter I, Transfer of Assets 

 Chapter J, Spousal Impoverishment 

 Chapter K, Reserved for Future Use 

 Chapter L, Reserved for Future Use 

 Chapter M, Medicaid Buy-In Program 

 Chapter N, Medicaid Buy-In for Children 

 Chapter O, Waiver Programs, Demonstration Projects and All-Inclusive Care 

 Chapter P, Long-term Care Partnership Program 

 Chapter Q, Medicare Savings Program 

 Chapter R, Case Disposition 

 MEPD Appendices 

 MEPD Glossary 

 MEPD Forms 

 MEPD Documents and Notices 

 MEPD Revisions 

 MEPD Policy Bulletins 

 MEPD Contact Us 

 D-7800, Medicaid Estate Recovery Program 

 Printer-friendly version 

 Body
 Revision 18-1; Effective March 1, 2018
 Another post-payment resource is through the MERP . On March 1, 2005, Texas implemented MERP in compliance with federal Medicaid and state laws. The program is managed by HHSC . Under this program, HHSC may file a claim against the estate of a deceased Medicaid recipient who: 1) was age 55 or older at the time Medicaid services were received; and 2) initially applied for certain long-term care services and supports on or after March 1, 2005. The most complete, current and accurate source of information regarding MERP is the HHS website, Medicaid Estate Recovery Program .
 Long-term care services and supports that are subject to MERP include:
 nursing facility services;
 intermediate care facilities for individuals with an intellectual disability or related conditions (ICF/IID) services, which include state supported living centers;
 Medicaid waiver programs, such as: Community Living Assistance and Support Services (CLASS);
 Deaf Blind with Multiple Disabilities (DBMD);
 Home and Community-based Services (HCS);
 Texas Home Living Program (TxHmL); and
 STAR+PLUS Waiver (SPW);

 Community Attendant Services (CAS); and
 related hospital and prescription drug services.
 Notes: 
 A person who is placed on an interest list for a Medicaid waiver program is not considered to have applied.
 If a person, aged 55 or older, was eligible for Medicaid or received other Medicaid-paid benefits, such as QMB , SLMB or QI-1, before March 1, 2005, but did not initially apply for or transfer to one of the types of long-term care services and supports subject to MERP until March 1, 2005, or after, the person's estate is subject to recovery of the cost of certain long-term care services and supports received after March 1, 2005.
 The acceptance of Medicaid assistance for the covered long-term care services provides a basis for a Class 7 probate claim. (This means there are six other classes of claims that receive priority in payment from the estate before Texas gets paid.) HHSC files a MERP claim in probate court against the estate of a deceased Medicaid recipient to recover the cost of certain Medicaid long-term care services and supports received by the Medicaid recipients. MERP will follow claims procedures specified in the Texas Estates Code and HHSC’s Medicaid Estate Recovery Program rules found at 1 TAC, Part 15, Chapter 373.
 For notification requirements, see Section B-2620 , HHSC MERP Notification Requirements.

 Compact with Texans 
 File Viewing 
 Notice of Privacy Practices 
 Report Fraud, Waste or Abuse 
 Statewide Search 
 Texas.gov 
 Texas Homeland Security 
 Texas Veterans Portal 
 Website Policy 

 © Copyright 2016-2026. Texas Health and Human Services Commission. All rights reserved.

 Back to top
