Source URL: https://web.archive.org/web/20240821023450id_/https://bepmanuals.health.utah.gov/Medicaidpolicy/800/835_Estate_Recovery.htm
Retrieved: 2026-09-23

835 Estate Recovery 

 DHHS - Medicaid Policy Manual 

 Click here to see this page in full context 

 Medicaid Policy                                                                 

 835 Estate Recovery 

 Effective 
 Date: July 1, 2019

 Previous 
 Policy 

 Background 

 Estate Recovery is an operation of law. The Omnibus 
 Reconciliation Act of 1993 required all states to implement an estate 
 recovery program. Utah has had the program in effect since 1985.  Additional 
 changes to the law were made by the Deficit Reduction Act of 2005 and 
 the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009. 

 Congress did not intend for the taxpayers to bear 
 the entire cost of the recipient's medical expenses, nor did Congress 
 intend to allow recipients to maintain significant assets or shelter assets 
 for the benefit of heirs. Estate recovery recoups some of the expenses 
 paid by the state and federal government for people who receive Medicaid 
 after age 55 if they do not have a surviving spouse, surviving minor children, 
 or surviving blind or disabled children.  

 Estate recovery occurs after the Medicaid recipient's 
 death. 

 Policy 
 Requirements 

 The Office of Recovery Services, on behalf of the 
 State of Utah, has the right, and federal obligation, to recover 
 from the recipient's estate, after the recipients death, all Medicaid 
 funds expended on behalf of a recipient who is 55 years of age or older 
 and has received Medicaid, if all of the following conditions are met: 

 There is no surviving spouse. 

 There are no surviving children under age 21. 

 There are no surviving blind or disabled children. 

 Medical costs paid after the recipient is age 55 
 or older that will be recovered include the following but are not limited 
 to: 

 Monthly 
 payments made on the recipient's behalf to a Medicaid Health Plan (Capitation 
 Payments), or mental health services provider 

 Premiums 
 paid for any health insurance plan 

 Pharmacy 
 charges 

 Doctor 
 and hospital charges 

 Ambulance 
 charges 

 Medical 
 equipment 

 Nursing 
 Home services 

 Home 
 and Community Based Waiver services 

 Other 
 Medicaid State Plan services 

 NOTE : 
 Medicaid will recover money used for capitation payments and any other 
 payments directly paid by Medicaid.    Monthly 
 capitation payments are recovered from your estate whether or not Medicaid 
 services were used. 

 Medicare premiums, deductibles and co-payments paid 
 under the Medicare Cost-Sharing programs are excluded from recovery.      

 ORS may file probate and/or place liens on the assets 
 of the estate to assure the States claim on the estate.   

 Estate recovery may be initiated after the death 
 of a surviving spouse, or blind or disabled child; or when a surviving 
 child turns 21. 

 In some cases, the state will place a lien on a Medicaid 
 recipient's property before the individual dies. These liens are called 
 TEFRA liens, after the name of the law passed to allow them. 

 TEFRA Liens may be placed on real property of an 
 unmarried recipient living in a nursing home and not expected to return 
 home. 

 The state determines a recipient 
 is not expected to return home once the recipient has been a resident 
 of a nursing facility for 180 consecutive days.

 NOTE : Any questions regarding estate recovery should 
 be discussed with the Office of Recovery Services. For more information 
 go to https://medicaid.utah.gov/Estate-Recovery
