Source URL: https://law.lis.virginia.gov/vacode/title55.1/chapter1/section55.1-106/
Retrieved: 2026-09-23

§ 55.1-106. Power of disposal in life tenant not to defeat remainder unless exercised; power of disposal held by fiduciary 

 Virginia General Assembly /

 LIS Learning Center /

 Privacy Policy /

 LIS home /

 Register Account /

 Login 

 Session Information 

 Bills & Resolutions 

 State Budget 

 Virginia Law 

 Reports to the General Assembly 

 Virginia Law 

 Select Search Type 

 All 
 Code of Virginia 
 Administrative Code 
 Constitution 
 Charters 
 Authorities 
 Compacts 
 Uncodified Acts 

 Code of Virginia

 Table of Contents » Title 55.1. Property and Conveyances » Subtitle I. Property Conveyances » Chapter 1. Creation and Limitation of Estates » Article 1. Creation and Transfer of Estates » § 55.1-106. Power of disposal in life tenant not to defeat remainder unless exercised; power of disposal held by fiduciary 

 Section 

 Print 
 PDF 
 email 

 Creating a Report: Check the sections you'd like to appear in the report, then use the "Create Report" button at the bottom of the page to generate your report. Once the report is generated you'll then have the option to download it as a pdf, print or email the report.

 Code of Virginia
Title 55.1. Property and Conveyances
Chapter 1. Creation and Limitation of Estates
 9/23/2026

 § 55.1-106 . Power of disposal in life tenant not to defeat remainder unless exercised; power of disposal held by fiduciary.
 If any interest in or claim to real estate or personal property is disposed of by deed or will for life, with a limitation in remainder over, and the same instrument confers expressly or by implication a power upon the life tenant in his lifetime or by will to dispose absolutely of such property, the limitation in remainder over shall not fail, or be defeated, except to the extent that the life tenant lawfully exercised such power of disposal. A deed of trust or mortgage executed by the life tenant shall not be construed to be an absolute disposition of the estate, unless such estate is sold under the deed of trust or mortgage. A power of disposal held by any person in a fiduciary capacity under an express trust in writing shall not be deemed to be held by such fiduciary in a beneficial capacity and shall not be construed in any manner to enlarge the beneficial interest otherwise given to him under such trust.
 Code 1919, § 5147; Code 1950, § 55-7; 1978, c. 659; 2005, c. 935 ; 2019, c. 712 .

 The chapters of the acts of assembly referenced in the historical citation at the end of this section may not constitute a comprehensive list of such chapters and may exclude chapters whose provisions have expired.

 Section 

 Code of Virginia 

 Popular Names 

 2026 Updates 

 Section Look Up 

 Go 

 Administrative Code 

 Constitution of Virginia 

 Charters 

 Authorities 

 Compacts 

 Uncodified Acts 

 Sign In

 Username:  

 Password:  

 Cancel 

 LIS Home 

 Lobbyist-in-a-Box 

 Privacy Policy 

 © Copyright Commonwealth of Virginia, 
 . All rights reserved. Site developed by the Division of Legislative Automated Systems (DLAS) . 
 Sign In
