Source URL: https://law.lis.virginia.gov/vacode/title32.1/chapter10/section32.1-326.1/
Retrieved: 2026-09-23

§ 32.1-326.1. Department to operate program of estate recovery 

 Virginia General Assembly /

 LIS Learning Center /

 Privacy Policy /

 LIS home /

 Register Account /

 Login 

 Session Information 

 Bills & Resolutions 

 State Budget 

 Virginia Law 

 Reports to the General Assembly 

 Virginia Law 

 Select Search Type 

 All 
 Code of Virginia 
 Administrative Code 
 Constitution 
 Charters 
 Authorities 
 Compacts 
 Uncodified Acts 

 Code of Virginia

 Table of Contents » Title 32.1. Health » Chapter 10. Department of Medical Assistance Services » Article 1. General Provisions » § 32.1-326.1. Department to operate program of estate recovery 

 Section 

 Print 
 PDF 
 email 

 Creating a Report: Check the sections you'd like to appear in the report, then use the "Create Report" button at the bottom of the page to generate your report. Once the report is generated you'll then have the option to download it as a pdf, print or email the report.

 Code of Virginia
Title 32.1. Health
Chapter 10. Department of Medical Assistance Services
 9/23/2026

 § 32.1-326.1 . Department to operate program of estate recovery.
 In accordance with applicable federal law and regulations, including those under Title XIX of the Social Security Act, the Department shall operate a program of estate recovery for all persons who receive payments or on whose behalf payments are made for Medicaid-financed nursing facility care by the Department. The amount recovered from the estate of a deceased recipient shall not exceed the amount of total Medicaid payments made on behalf of such recipient.
 1993, cc. 193, 700.

 The chapters of the acts of assembly referenced in the historical citation at the end of this section may not constitute a comprehensive list of such chapters and may exclude chapters whose provisions have expired.

 Section 

 Code of Virginia 

 Popular Names 

 2026 Updates 

 Section Look Up 

 Go 

 Administrative Code 

 Constitution of Virginia 

 Charters 

 Authorities 

 Compacts 

 Uncodified Acts 

 Virginia Law Library

 The Code of Virginia, Constitution of Virginia, Charters, Authorities, Compacts and Uncodified Acts are available in both PDF and CSV formats. 

 Helpful Resources

 Virginia Code Commission 

 Virginia Register of Regulations 

 U.S. Constitution 

 For Developers

 The Virginia Law website data is available via a web service. 

 Sign In

 Username:  

 Password:  

 Cancel 

 LIS Home 

 Lobbyist-in-a-Box 

 Privacy Policy 

 © Copyright Commonwealth of Virginia, 
 . All rights reserved. Site developed by the Division of Legislative Automated Systems (DLAS) . 
 Sign In
