Source URL: https://www.dmas.virginia.gov/media/3365/417c-estate-recoveries.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-09-23

STATE PLAN UNDER TITLE XIX OF THE SOCIAL SECURITY ACT                                  ATTACHMENT 4.17-C

State of Virginia                                                                                   page 1 of 6


                                             Estate Recoveries


Citation                                                Condition or Requirement


12VAC 30-20-141.

    A. Definitions. The following words and terms when used in this regulation shall have the
       following meanings unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:

“Act” means the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. § 1396) as applicable.

“Applicable medical assistance payment” means the amount of any medical assistance payments made on
behalf of an individual under title XIX of the Social Security Act.

“Claim” means, for the purposes of this section, action taken by DMAS to recover from the estate of an
individual, who was age 55 or older when that person received medical assistance, the total amount of
assistance paid for services consistent with the coverage and reimbursement policies in the State Plan for
Medical Assistance.

“Cost effective” means that both the dollar amount of the medical assistance payments (claim) and the
value of the estate at least exceed the administrative costs of recovery.

“Dual eligibles” means individuals who are entitled to Medicare hospital insurance under Part A or
supplementary medical insurance under Part B, or both, and are eligible for some form of Medicaid
benefit.

“Estate” means, with respect to a deceased individual, (i) all real and personal property and other assets
held by the individual at the time of death and (ii) any other real and personal property and other assets in
which the individual had any legal title or interest (to the extent of such interest) at the time of his death.

“Homestead of modest value” means a home that is worth 50% or less of the average, median, price, as
contained in the most recent U.S. Census data or any other such source of home value information as
published in the agency’s guidance documents, of homes in the county or city, as appropriate, where the
homestead is located as of the date of the individual’s death.

“Undue hardship” means that DMAS has determined that enforcement of a claim to recover Medicaid
benefits would result in substantial hardship to the devisees, legatees, and heirs or dependents of the
deceased individual against whose estate the Medicaid claim exists.




TN No.        09-10                    Approval Date    10/06/09              Effective Date 07-01-09
Supersedes
TN No.        95-09
STATE PLAN UNDER TITLE XIX OF THE SOCIAL SECURITY ACT                              ATTACHMENT 4.17-C

State of Virginia                                                                              page 2 of 6
    B. Under the authority and consistent with the requirements of the Social Security Act §1917 (the
       Act), the Commonwealth shall recover applicable medical assistance payments when such
       payments have been correctly or incorrectly paid on behalf of certain individuals. The
       Department of Medical Assistance Services (DMAS) shall provide notice of the
       Commonwealth’s Medicaid estate recovery program at the time of application for medical
       assistance.

    C. Adjustment and recovery. Adjustment or recovery can only be made after the death of the
       individual’s surviving spouse, if any, and only at a time when the individual has no surviving
       child under age 21, or a blind or disabled child as defined in § 1614 of the Act. The
       Commonwealth shall seek adjustment or recover of all medical assistance payments correctly
       paid on behalf of an individual who is age 55 or older under the State Plan as follows:

    1. The Commonwealth shall seek adjustment or recovery from the estate of an individual who was
       age 55 or older when that person received medical assistance. The Commonwealth shall recover
       amounts up to the total amount spent on the individual’s behalf for medical assistance for all
       items or services provided for the individual under the State Plan.

    2. Dual eligible protection from recovery.

    (a)      The Commonwealth shall recover from the estates of the following dual eligible individuals,
             who are age 55 or older, who receive full Medicaid benefits in addition to Medicare: (i)
             qualified Medicare beneficiaries with full Medicaid benefits (QMB Plus), (ii) specified low-
             income Medicare beneficiaries with full Medicaid benefits (SLMB Plus), and (iii) Medicare
             beneficiaries eligible for a limited package of Medicaid benefits (QMB, SLMB, qualified
             individuals (QI) or qualified disabled and working individuals (QDWI)).                  The
             Commonwealth shall recover from these individuals’ estates medical assistance payments
             made on behalf of these individuals with the exception of Medicare cost sharing benefits or
             for benefits described in §1902(a)(10)(E). This exception shall apply to Medicare cost
             sharing benefits (i.e., Part A and B premiums, deductibles, coinsurance, and co-payments)
             with dates of service on or after January 1, 2010. The date of service for deductibles,
             coinsurance, and co-payments shall be the date the request for payment is received by
             DMAS. The date of service for premiums shall be the date the Medicaid agency paid the
             premium.
    (b)      The above protection from estate recovery against Medicare cost sharing benefits (premiums,
             deductibles, coinsurance, co-payments) which is made for the applicable categories of
             protected dual eligible persons above, shall apply to approved mandatory and optional
             services set out in the State Plan for which Medicare cost sharing applies.

    3. The Commonwealth shall recover from individuals with long-term care insurance policies.
       However, the Commonwealth shall not seek adjustment or recovery from the individual’s estate
       for all Medicaid for nursing facility and other long-term care services if assets or resources are
       disregarded to the extent of payments made under a qualified long-term care partnership
       insurance policy.




TN No.        10-06                  Approval Date    07/14/10            Effective Date 04-01-10
Supersedes
TN No.        09-10
STATE PLAN UNDER TITLE XIX OF THE SOCIAL SECURITY ACT                         ATTACHMENT 4.17-C

State of Virginia                                                                          page 3 of 6




    (c)      Estate recovery and managed care. When a Medicaid beneficiary is enrolled in a
             managed care organization and services are provided by the managed care
             organization that are included under the State Plan, the Commonwealth shall seek
             adjustment or recovery from the individual’s estate for the capitation payments in the
             Commonwealth’s claim against the estate. When the individual enrolls in the
             managed care organization, the Commonwealth shall provide a separate notice to the
             individual that explains that the capitation payments made to the managed care
             organization are included in whole in the claim against the estate. The
             Commonwealth shall recover from the individual’s estate the total capitation payment
             for the period the individual was enrolled in the managed care organization.

    (d)      The following American Indian/Alaska Native (AI/AN) income, resources, and
             property shall be exempt from Medicaid estate recovery pursuant to § 1917(b)(3) of
             the Act for hardship applicable to federally recognized tribes:

    a. Certain AI/AN income and resources (such as interests in and income derived from tribal
       land and other resources currently held in trust status and judgment funds from the Indian
       Claims Commission and the U.S. court of Federal Claims) that are exempt from Medicaid
       estate recovery by other laws and regulations;
    b. Ownership interest in trust or non-trust property, including real property and
       improvements;

    (1) Located on a reservation (any federally recognized Indian tribe’s reservation or near a
        reservation) as designate and approved by the Bureau of Indian Affairs of the U.S.
        Department of the Interior; or

    (2) For any federally recognized tribe not described in this subdivision, located within the
        most recent boundaries of a prior federal reservation.

    (3) Protection of non-trust property described in this subdivision is limited to circumstances
        when it passes from an Indian (as defined in § 4 of the Indian Health Care Improvement
        Act, 25 USC §§ 1601-1683) to one or more relatives (by blood, adoption, or marriage),
        including Indians not enrolled as members of a tribe and non-Indians, such as spouses
        and stepchildren, that their culture would nevertheless protect as family members; to a
        tribe or tribal organization or to one or more Indians, or all of these;




TN No.        09-10                 Approval Date   10/06/09          Effective Date 07-01-09
Supersedes
TN No.        95-09
STATE PLAN UNDER TITLE XIX OF THE SOCIAL SECURITY ACT                             ATTACHMENT 4.17-C

State of Virginia                                                                             page 4 of 6




    c. Income left as a remainder in an estate derived from property protected in this
       subdivision, that was either collected by an Indian, or by a tribe or tribal organization and
       distributed to an Indian or Indians, as long as the Individual can clearly trace such income
       as coming from the protected property.
    d. Ownership interests left as a remainder in an estate in rents, leases, royalties, or usage
       rights related to natural resources (including, but not necessarily limited to, extraction of
       natural resources or harvesting of timber, other plants and plant products, animals, fish,
       and shellfish) resulting from the exercise of federally protected rights, and income either
       collected by an Indian, or by a tribe or tribal organization and distributed to an Indian or
       Indians derived from these sources as long as the individual can clearly trace the interest
       as coming from protected sources.
    e. Ownership interests in or usage rights to items not covered by this subdivision that have
       unique religious, spiritual, tradition, or cultural significance or rights, or all of these, that
       support subsistence or a traditional lifestyle according to applicable tribal law or custom.

    (e)      The Commonwealth shall recover the following income, resource and property from
             the estate of American Indians and Alaska Natives:

    a. Ownership interests in assets and property, both real and personal, that are not described
       in this subdivision.
    b. Any income and assets left as a remainder in an estate that do not derive from protected
       property or sources in this subdivision.

    (f)      Reparation payments to individuals. Government reparation payments to special
             populations shall be exempt from Medicaid estate recovery.

8. Annuities. The Commonwealth considers annuities to be legal devices by which ownership of
assets, such as estates, is defined and therefore may seek recovery from individuals’ estates that
may include such annuities.




TN No.        09-10                 Approval Date    10/06/09            Effective Date 07-01-09
Supersedes
TN No.        95-09
STATE PLAN UNDER TITLE XIX OF THE SOCIAL SECURITY ACT                         ATTACHMENT 4.17-C

State of Virginia                                                                          page 5 of 6




    D. Undue hardship. Whenever estate recovery would work an undue hardship on the
       deceased individual’s heirs, the Commonwealth shall waive adjustment or recovery.
       Recovery from deceased individuals’ estates shall be waived when the heirs are
       themselves Medicaid eligible. Anyone who may be affected by Medicaid estate recovery
       may apply for an undue hardship waiver. DMAS shall determine the merit of such
       applications.

    1. Special consideration shall be shown in cases in which the estate subject to recovery is:
       (i) the sole income-producing asset of survivors (where such income is limited), such as a
       family farm or other family business; (ii) a homestead of modest value; (iii) other
       compelling circumstances exist as may be set out in agency guidance documents.

    2. An undue hardship exists when the Commonwealth determines that it would not be cost
       effective to recover the assistance paid.

    3. In cases where recovery is not waived and heirs of the estate from which recovery is
       sought wish to satisfy the Commonwealth’s claim without selling a non-liquid asset that
       is subject to recovery, alternative methods of recovery may be considered. DMAS may
       also establish a reasonable payment schedule.

    4. The Commonwealth may limit the hardship waiver to the time period during which the
       undue hardship circumstances existed or continue to exist.

    5. An undue hardship shall not exist if the beneficiary created the hardship by resorting to
       estate planning methods under which the beneficiary divested assets in order to avoid
       estate recovery.

    E. DMAS shall establish collection procedures to include identification of the estate
       administrator or executor, determination of the medical assistance claim amount,
       notification procedures, and such other procedures as are appropriate to pursue the
       recovery of medical assistance expenditures. Such procedures will be set out in an
       agency guidance document.




TN No.        09-10                Approval Date   10/06/09           Effective Date 07-01-09
Supersedes
TN No.        95-09
STATE PLAN UNDER TITLE XIX OF THE SOCIAL SECURITY ACT                         ATTACHMENT 4.17-C

State of Virginia                                                                          page 6 of 6




    F. Recovery or adjustment not cost effective. DMAS shall establish a cost effectiveness
       threshold below which estate recovery will not be pursued.

    1. The Commonwealth may waive adjustment or recovery in cases in which it is determined
       that it would not be cost effective for the Commonwealth to recover from a deceased
       individual’s estate. The estate administrator, executor, survivor, or heir does not need to
       assert undue hardship in such situations.

    2. In determining whether recovery would be cost effective, the department may consider,
       but is not limited to consideration of, the following costs: staff time, litigation costs,
       expert witness fees, deposition expenses, travel expenses, office supplies, postage,
       advertising, and publishing costs. Dmas shall adjust the cost effective threshold as the
       agency’s administrative costs change.

G. Appeals. The DMAS Appeals Division will administer appeals related to the recovery of
funds pursuant to 12 VAC 30-110.




TN No.        09-10                Approval Date   10/06/09           Effective Date 07-01-09
Supersedes
TN No.        95-09

