Source URL: https://humanservices.vermont.gov/sites/ahsnew/files/documents/Covered-Services-Rules-040124.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-09-23

 Department of Vermont Health Access                                                                                    Medicaid Covered Services Rules




Contents
7101     Medicaid Benefit Delivery ............................................................................................................................ 2
7102     Prior Authorization ........................................................................................................................................ 8
7105     Medical Service Payments........................................................................................................................... 13
7106     Violations of Provider Responsibility ......................................................................................................... 16
7107     Utilization Control ....................................................................................................................................... 23
7108     Third Party Liability .................................................................................................................................... 24
7109     Health Care Trust Fund ............................................................................................................................... 29
7301     Physicians and Other Licensed Practitioners............................................................................................... 31
7317     Rehabilitative Therapy Services .................................................................................................................. 33
7403     Clinic Services ............................................................................................................................................. 35
7405     Laboratory and Radiology Services ............................................................................................................ 36
7411      Private Non-Medical Institutions................................................................................................................ 38
7601     Long-Term Care Services ............................................................................................................................ 40
7602     Supplementation Prohibition ....................................................................................................................... 42
7603     Services Covered in a Nursing Facility ....................................................................................................... 43
7604     Duration of Coverage .................................................................................................................................. 45
7605      Authorization for Long-Term Care ......................................................................................................... 47
7606 Nursing Facility Care in Hospitals - Swing Beds ................................................................................ 49
7700     Pharmacy Administration ............................................................................................................................ 50


Didn’t find what you were looking for? Additional Vermont Medicaid rules can be found on the Agency of
Human Services website:
    •   Health Care Administrative Rules (HCAR)
    •   Health Benefits Eligibility and Enrollment Rules (HBEE)




                                                                                                                                                                       1
Department of Vermont Health Access                                                       Medicaid Covered Services Rules


                                             Medicaid Benefit Delivery


 7101       Medicaid Benefit Delivery                       (06/01/2018, GCR 17-090)

          7101.1 Overview

              The following includes steps the department, the eligible Medicaid beneficiary and the medical care
              provider must take for the provider to receive payment for services given to the beneficiary.

              (a) The department must:

                  (1) Give each Medicaid eligible person an identification document showing that the person has been
                      found eligible for Medicaid; and
                  (2) Accept and process all provider claims itself or through its administrative agent; and
                  (3) Notify providers of decisions on claims and pay approved claims.

              (b) The beneficiary must:

                  (1) Tell the provider he or she wants the provider's services charged to Medicaid; and
                  (2) Advise the provider if he or she has private health insurance coverage in addition to Medicaid; and
                  (3) Accept liability for any applicable co-payment; and
                  (4) Show the provider his or her identification document if it has been issued.

              (c) The provider must:

                  (1) Verify that the beneficiary is still eligible for Medicaid on the date the service is provided; and
                  (2) Bill any other liable third parties prior to billing Medicaid; and
                  (3) Accept the Medicaid payment rate as payment in full and bill the beneficiary only for any
                      applicable co-payments once Medicaid has been accepted as a source of payment; and
                  (4) Give a Medicaid covered service; and
                  (5) File a claim with the department or its agent, including all necessary information about the
                      service and the identifying information from the beneficiary's identification document.

          7101.2 Disenrollment of Beneficiaries

                 (a) In rare instances, it may become necessary to pursue disenrollment of
                     beneficiaries who are intentionally unresponsive to basic managed care
                     expectations. The following may be disenrolled:

                         (1) Beneficiaries who pose a threat to plan employees or other members.
                         (2) Beneficiaries who regularly fail to arrive for scheduled appointments without canceling,
                             despite documented aggressive outreach efforts by the managed health care plan.
                         (3) Beneficiaries who do not cooperate with treatment and have not made an affirmative
                             decision to refuse treatment, despite documented aggressive outreach efforts by the plan.

                 (b) Grounds for disenrollment does not include beneficiaries who have cooperated with the
                     plan in its effort to inform them fully of the treatment options and the consequences of
                     their decisions regarding treatment and who have subsequently made an informed
                     decision to refuse treatment.

                 (c) Plan disenrollment requests must conform to criteria for disenrollment established by the
                     department. Managed health care plans must notify the affected member, or his or her designated


                                                                                                                            2
Department of Vermont Health Access                                                      Medicaid Covered Services Rules



                                              Medicaid Benefit Delivery



                    representative, in writing, of a plan-initiated request for disenrollment. Only the department may
                    disenroll a member from a managed health care plan.

                (d) Beneficiaries remain in the managed health care plan until the department decides to
                    disenroll the beneficiary. Beneficiaries are notified of this decision in writing and of their
                    right to request a fair hearing before the Human Services Board. Medicaid beneficiaries
                    who are disenrolled, unless enrolled in another managed health care plan or the PCCM
                    program immediately thereafter, will receive services through the traditional fee-for-
                    service system.

           7101.3 Primary Care Case Management (PCCM)

              The primary care case management (PCCM) program is a managed health care service delivery system
              that requires a beneficiary to choose a primary care provider (PCP) and to access specified medical care
              through this provider. The primary care provider (PCP) will provide and coordinate medical care for the
              beneficiary through direct service delivery or by making appropriate referrals to other providers for
              necessary services.

                  (a) Definitions

                      (1) “Adverse determination” means a determination by the DVHA that an admission,
                          availability of care, continued stay or other health care service has been reviewed and, based
                          upon the information provided, does not meet the DVHA's requirements for medical
                          necessity, appropriateness, health care setting, level of care or effectiveness, and the requested
                          service is therefore denied, reduced or terminated.
                      (2) “Certification” means a determination by the DVHA or its designated utilization review
                          organization that an admission, availability of care, continued stay or other health care service
                          has been reviewed and, based on the information provided, satisfies the DVHA's requirements
                          for medical necessity, appropriateness, health care setting, level and intensity of care and
                          effectiveness.
                      (3) “Clinical review criteria” means the written screening procedures, decision abstracts,
                          clinical protocols, practice guidelines and utilization management and review guidelines used
                          by the DVHA to determine the necessity and appropriateness of health care services.
                      (4) “Concurrent review” means utilization review conducted during a beneficiary's hospital
                          stay or course of treatment.
                      (5) “DVHA” means the Department of Vermont Health Access.
                      (6) “Health care services” or “services” means services for the diagnosis, prevention,
                          treatment, cure or relief of a health condition, illness, injury or disease.
                      (7) “Primary care provider” means family practitioners, general internists, pediatricians, or
                          doctors of general medicine that shall provide and coordinate medical care for the
                          beneficiary as defined in 7101.3(b).
                      (8) “Retrospective review” means utilization review of medical necessity that is conducted
                          after services have been provided to a beneficiary, but does not include the review of a claim
                          that is limited to an evaluation of reimbursement levels, veracity of documentation, accuracy
                          of coding or adjudication for payment.
                      (9) “Second opinion” means an opportunity or requirement to obtain a clinical evaluation by a
                          provider other than the one originally making a recommendation for a proposed health care
                          service to assess the clinical necessity and appropriateness of the proposed service.



                                                                                                                               3
Department of Vermont Health Access                                                     Medicaid Covered Services Rules



                                              Medicaid Benefit Delivery


                      (10) “Urgently-needed care” or “urgent care” means those health care services that are
                          necessary to treat a condition or illness of an individual that if not treated within twenty-
                          four (24) hours presents a serious risk of harm.
                      (11) “Utilization review” means a set of formal techniques designed to monitor the use of, or
                           evaluate the clinical necessity, appropriateness, efficacy, or efficiency of, health care
                           services, procedures, or settings.

                  (b) Primary Care Provider (PCP)

                  Under this system a payment is made to the primary care provider (PCP) each month for case
                  management services provided to each beneficiary enrolled with the PCP. Family practitioners,
                  general internists, pediatricians, or doctors of general medicine, that are enrolled with Vermont
                  Medicaid may become a PCP in the PCCM program. Specialists may become a PCP only under the
                  conditions described below. The PCP selected by a beneficiary shall coordinate needed medical
                  services. PCPs will be responsible for providing beneficiaries with referrals to specialists when in
                  their judgement it is considered medically necessary; for coordinating all ancillary, outpatient and
                  inpatient services; and for preventing the duplication of services.

                  If a beneficiary has either a life-threatening condition or disease, or a degenerative or disabling
                  condition or disease, that requires specialized medical care over a prolonged period of time, a
                  specialist with expertise in treating the condition or disease may act as the beneficiary's PCP. If a
                  specialist agrees to act as the PCP, the specialist shall provide and coordinate medical care for the
                  beneficiary through direct service delivery or by making appropriate referrals to other providers for
                  necessary services. The DVHA Medical Director must review and approve of such arrangements
                  before a specialist may become the PCP. If the request is denied by DVHA, the beneficiary has the
                  right to appeal DVHA's decision and to request a fair hearing.

                  (c) Change of Primary Care Provider (PCP)

                  Enrollees may change their primary care provider (PCP) for any reason every 30 days.
                  Primary care provider changes will become effective on the first day of
                  the following month, if all required actions have been completed by the fifteenth of the
                  prior month. Otherwise, the change shall become effective the first of
                  the second month after all required actions are completed.

                  If a beneficiary has to change PCP as a result of his or her PCP restricting or terminating
                  participation in the PCCM program, the DVHA will assist the beneficiary in selecting another
                  PCP in order to assure continuity of care.

                  (d) Procedures for Utilization Review Decisions

                      (1) The DVHA shall maintain written procedures for making utilization review decisions
                          and for notifying beneficiaries, representatives of beneficiaries, and providers acting on
                          behalf of beneficiaries of its decisions.
                      (2) For initial and concurrent review determinations, the DVHA shall, within three (3)
                          working days of obtaining all necessary information regarding the admission, procedure
                          or service requiring a review determination, make the determination and notify the treating
                          provider of the determination by telephone. Written confirmation of the determination
                          will be sent to the provider within twenty-four (24) hours of the telephone notification.


                                                                                                                          4
Department of Vermont Health Access                                                      Medicaid Covered Services Rules



                                              Medicaid Benefit Delivery



                              (i) In the case of an adverse concurrent review determination, the beneficiary shall
                                   not be liable for any services provided before notification to the beneficiary of the
                                   adverse determination. Benefits will continue if a fair hearing is requested.
                              (ii) The DVHA shall establish procedures to expedite initial and concurrent review
                                   determinations in cases involving urgently-needed care. In no event shall the
                                   DVHA take more than twenty-four (24) hours from the time the service is first
                                   requested to make an initial or concurrent review determination for such services.

                      (3) The DVHA shall conduct retrospective review determinations consistent with federal
                          requirements.

                      (4) A written notification of an adverse determination shall include the principal reason or
                          reasons for the determination and instructions on how to appeal the determination and
                          how to request additional information. Within 90 days of PCCM program
                          implementation, the DVHA will add to the written notification, the clinical rationale for
                          the determination including an explanation of the clinical review criteria used to make
                          the determination. The DVHA shall make the actual clinical review criteria available to
                          the beneficiary upon request.

                      (5) The DVHA shall act promptly and in good faith to obtain the information necessary to make
                          utilization review decisions. For purposes of this section, “necessary information” includes
                          the results of any face-to-face clinical evaluation or second opinion that may be required.

                      (6) The DVHA shall have written procedures to address the failure or inability of a provider or a
                          beneficiary to provide all necessary information for utilization review, which shall include a
                          description of the information required for the review. Copies of the procedures are available
                          to all network providers. In cases where the provider or beneficiary will not release the
                          necessary information, the DVHA may deny certification. In no event shall the DVHA
                          penalize a provider for failing to provide a beneficiary's medical records to the DVHA when
                          the beneficiary has not authorized release of the records and the provider is not otherwise
                          obligated by law or regulation to disclose the records.

                  (e) Network Adequacy

                     The DVHA will not require any beneficiary to be assigned to the PCCM program unless covered
                     health care services, including referrals to participating specialty physicians, are accessible to
                     members on a timely basis, as follows. The DVHA will make a good faith effort to attract
                     sufficient numbers and types of providers to ensure that all covered health care services will be
                     provided without unreasonable delay.

                     (1) Travel times for PCCM beneficiaries, under normal conditions from their residence or
                         place of business, generally should not exceed the following:

                              (i) Thirty (30) minutes to a network primary care provider;
                              (ii) Thirty (30) minutes to an outpatient facility for mental health or chemical dependency
                                  services;
                              (iii) Sixty (60) minutes for laboratory, x-ray, pharmacy, general optometry, inpatient
                                    psychiatric, MRI and inpatient medical rehabilitation services;
                              (iv) Ninety (90) minutes for cardiac catheterization laboratory, kidney transplantation,
                                    major trauma treatment, neonatal intensive care, and open-heart surgery services; and

                                                                                                                            5
Department of Vermont Health Access                                                       Medicaid Covered Services Rules



                                              Medicaid Benefit Delivery

                                (v) Reasonable accessibility for other specialty hospital services, including major burn
                                    care, organ transplantation (other than kidneys), and specialty pediatric care.

                       (2) Waiting times for appointments should generally not exceed the following:

                                (i) Immediate access to emergency care; and
                                (ii) Twenty-four (24) hours for urgent care; and
                                (iii) Two (2) weeks for the initial treatment of non-emergency or non-urgent care, with
                                      prompt follow-up care as necessary, including referrals for specialty services; and
                                (iv) Ninety (90) days for preventive care (including routine physical examinations);
                                      and
                                (v) Thirty (30) days for routine laboratory, x-ray, general optometry, and all other
                                      routine services.

                       (3) The DVHA shall develop and implement written standards or guidelines that address the
                           assessment of provider capacity to provide timely access to health care services.

                   (f) Confidential Information

                       The DVHA shall take the appropriate steps necessary to ensure that information gathered
                       by it in its quality assurance activities shall be confidential and privileged.

                   (g) Disclosure of Information

            The DVHA shall supply to each beneficiary upon enrollment and upon major revision thereafter the following
            information consistent with 42 CFR §438.10(g). The information shall be in handbook form and in twelve-
            point type, and shall be in plain language. This requirement may be satisfied by giving a copy of the
            handbook to each household, rather than to each beneficiary. The DVHA shall make available to any
            beneficiary, upon request, a listing by specialty of the name, telephone number and address of all health care
            providers and health care facilities enrolled in PCCM and Medicaid (including, in the case of physicians,
            information as to board certification). This list shall be updated (by addendum or otherwise) at least once
            every six months, and shall indicate which primary care providers are accepting new patients. In addition,
            the handbook shall include:

            1. Coverage provisions, including covered health care services and items, benefit maximums, benefit
            limitations, exclusions from coverage (including procedures deemed experimental or investigational by the
            DVHA), restrictions on referral or treatment options, requirements for prior authorization or utilization
            review, the use of formularies, and any other limitations on the services covered.

            2. A description of the rule 7104 procedure for coverage of prescription drugs from manufacturers that do
            not participate in the federal rebate program. In addition to the criteria contained in rule 7104, the DVHA
            shall also consider the following criteria in making rule 7104 determinations for prescription drugs. The
            currently covered drug:

            •   has not been effective in treating the patient's medical condition; or

            • causes or is reasonably expected to cause adverse or harmful reactions in the beneficiary.

            3. If prior authorization or utilization review is required before obtaining treatment or services, the process
            a beneficiary must use to obtain that authorization or review, including any time lines that apply.




                                                                                                                              6
Department of Vermont Health Access                                                      Medicaid Covered Services Rules


                                               Medicaid Benefit Delivery



            4. The financial inducements offered to any Medicaid provider or health care facility
            for the reduction or limitation of health care services. Nothing in this paragraph shall
            be construed to require disclosure of individual contracts or the specific details of any
            financial arrangement between the DVHA and a health care provider.

            5. The beneficiary's responsibility for payment of premiums, coinsurance, co-payments, deductibles and
            any other charges, annual limits on a beneficiary's financial responsibility, caps on payments for covered
            services, and the beneficiary's financial responsibility for non-covered procedures, treatments or services.
           6. The beneficiary's financial responsibility for payment when services are provided by a health care
           provider who is not part of the PCCM network or by any provider after
           an adverse determination by the DVHA.
            7.   The criteria used by the DVHA for selecting and credentialing the health care providers it enrolls.
            8. The grievance and appeals procedures used to resolve disputes between a beneficiary and the
            DVHA.
            9.   A summary of its quality assessment and quality improvement programs.
           10. The utilization review procedures of the organization, including the credentials and training of
           utilization review personnel.
            11. The procedure for obtaining emergency services, including any requirements for prior authorization
            and payment for services rendered outside of Vermont.
            12. All necessary mailing addresses and telephone numbers to be used by beneficiaries seeking
            information or authorization.
            13. The process for selecting primary care providers and for obtaining access to other providers in
            the PCCM network, including any restrictions on the use of network specialists.
            14. The procedure for changing primary and specialty care providers within PCCM, including any
            restrictions on changing providers.
            15. How beneficiaries can obtain standing referrals to Medicaid participating specialists, or use
            specialists or specialized facilities to provide and coordinate their primary and specialty care.
            16. The waiting time and travel time standards established in this rule.
            17. Whether the health care providers are prohibited from participating in other managed care plans or
            from performing services for persons who are not members of the PCCM program.
           18. Opportunities for beneficiary participation in the development of DVHA policies and in the DVHA's
           quality assurance and quality improvement activities.
            19. The consumer information and services, including the toll-free number for the DVHA Ombudsman.
            20. A list of all information available to the beneficiary upon request.




                                                                                                                           7
Department of Vermont Health Access                                          Medicaid Covered Services Rules


                                              Prior Authorization


7102        Prior Authorization                 (04/01/1999, 98-11F)

Prior authorization is a process used by the department to assure the appropriate use of health care services.
The goal of prior authorization is to assure that the proposed health service is medically needed; that all
appropriate, less-expensive alternatives have been given consideration; and that the proposed service
conforms to generally accepted practice parameters recognized by health care providers in the same or
similar general specialty who typically treat or manage the diagnosis or condition. It involves a request
for approval of each health service that is designated as requiring prior approval before the service is
rendered. The department shall notify each patient and provider of its decision, which is arrived at by
applying the criteria set forth in rule 7102.2.

“Health services: as used in these rules include services, items or procedures.

7102.1     Criteria for Prior Authorization    (04/01/1999, 98-11F)

   The department may require prior authorization of payment for a service when one or more of the
   following criteria are met.

      A. The health service is of questionable medical necessity as determined by the department.
      B. The department determines that use of the health service needs monitoring to manage the
         expenditure of program funds.
      C. Less expensive appropriate alternatives to the health service are generally available.
      D. The health service is investigational.
      E.   The health service is newly developed or modified.
      F.   The department determines that monitoring a health service of a continuing nature is necessary
           to prevent the continuation of the service when it ceases to be beneficial.

   The complete and current list of all services and items including procedure codes that require prior
   authorization is set out in the Provider Manual. The list is updated periodically. Additions and
   deletions to the list are also published in advance in the provider advisory newsletter and other
   communications to providers.

7102.2     Prior Authorization Determination      (04/01/1999, 98-11F)

   A request for prior authorization of a covered health service will be approved if the health service:

      A. is medically necessary (see rule 7103);
      B. is appropriate and effective to the medical needs of the beneficiary;
      C. is timely, considering the nature and present state of the beneficiary's medical condition;
      D. is the least expensive, appropriate health service available;
      E.   is FDA approved, if it is FDA regulated;
      F.   is subject to a manufacturer's rebate agreement, if a drug;
      G. is not a preliminary procedure or treatment leading to a service that is not covered;


                                                                                                                 8
                                 INTERPRETIVE MEMO
[X] Medicaid Covered Services Rule             [ ] Medicaid Covered Services Procedure
Interpretation                                                           Interpretation


This interpretive memo remains effective statewide until it is specifically supersededed-either by a
subsequent interpretive memo or by a contradictory rule with a later date.

Reference      7102.4                                   Date of this Memo       05/01/2008 Page 1 of 1

This Memo: [X] is New      [ ] Replaces one dated



QUESTION:       Is there a change in the timeframe for processing prior authorization requests?

ANSWER:          Yes. The timeframes now correspond to 42 CFR §438.210. OVHA will continue to
                 issue a notice of decision within three days of receipt of all the necessary information.
                 However, the longest time to wait for a decision is now 28 days, not 30. A request
                 must be decided within 14 days of receipt of the request, but that time frame may be
                 extended up to another 14 days if the beneficiary or provider request the extension,
                 or if the extension is needed to obtain additional information and an extension is in
                 the beneficiary’s interest.
                 Also, when a provider indicates, or OVHA determines, that following this timeframe
                 could seriously jeopardize the beneficiary’s life, health, or ability to attain, maintain, or
                 regain maximum function, OVHA must make an expedited decision and provide notice
                 as expeditiously as the beneficiary’s health condition requires and no later than three
                 working days after receipt of the request. This may be extended up to 14 days if the
                 beneficiary so requests, or if the extension is needed to obtain additional information
                 and an extension is in the beneficiary’s interest.




                                                                                                                 9
Department of Vermont Health Access                                            Medicaid Covered Services Rules


                                               Prior Authorization


     H. is not the repair of an item uncovered by Medicaid;
     I.       is not experimental or investigational;
     J.       is furnished by a provider with appropriate credentials.

   The department is responsible for determining questions of coverage and medical necessity under the
   Vermont Medicaid program. The department may contract with external organizations to help make
   these determinations; however, the final decision rests with the department.

   Supporting information for a prior authorization request must include a completed claim and a
   completed medical necessity form. Additional information that may be required includes:
          •    the patients complete medical record;
          •    the patients plan of care;
          •    a statement of long-term and short-term treatment goals;
          •    a response to clinical questions posed by the department;
          •    a second opinion or an evaluation by another practitioner, at Medicaid expense;
          •    the practitioners detailed and reasoned opinion in support of medical necessity;
          •    a statement of the alternatives considered and the provider's reasons for rejecting them; and,
          •    a statement of the practitioner's evaluation of alternatives suggested by the department and the
               provider's reasons for rejecting them.

   If any of this additional information is required, the department will notify the provider promptly.
   Once the necessary information has been received, the beneficiary will be sent a notice of decision
   that may be appealed. See rule 4151.

7102.3        Waiver of Prior Authorization     (04/01/1999, 98-11F)

   The department shall waive the requirement that a covered service receive prior authorization if, in
   the department's judgement, the service provided without prior authorization meets one or both of
   the following circumstances.
          •    The service was required to treat an emergency medical condition.
          •    The service was provided prior to the determination of Medicaid eligibility and within the
               retroactive coverage period.

7102.4        Prior Authorization Process     (04/01/1999, 98-11F)

   Prior authorization commences with the receipt of a written prior authorization request. The
   department will issue a notice of decision within three working days of receiving all necessary
   information. The department will act in good faith to obtain the necessary information promptly so
   that it can determine, within 30 days, whether the request may be approved. The department will
   issue a notice of decision within 30 days of receiving the initial prior authorization request, even if all
   necessary information has not been received.


                                                                                                                10
                                      INTERPRETIVE MEMO

[X] Medicaid Covered Services Rule                          [ ] Medicaid Covered Services Procedure
Interpretation                                                                        Interpretation

This interpretive memo remains effective statewide until it is specifically supersededed-either by a
subsequent interpretive memo or by a contradictory rule with a later date.

Reference    7105 Date of this Memo     09/01/2013           Page    1 of 1
This Memo: [X] is New [ ] Replaces one dated




QUESTION:       Have there been any changes to Medical Service Payments?

ANSWER:          Yes. On at least a quarterly basis, the DVHA, instead of its fiscal agent, sends a notice
                 of Medicaid benefits paid to a sample of beneficiaries who received a service during
                 that quarter.




                                                                                                         11
                                     INTERPRETIVE MEMO

[X] Medicaid Covered Services Rule                         [ ] Medicaid Covered Services Procedure
Interpretation                                                                       Interpretation

This interpretive memo remains effective statewide until it is specifically supersededed-either by a
subsequent interpretive memo or by a contradictory rule with a later date.
Reference    7105.1 Date of this Memo 05/01/2012 Page 1 of 1
This Memo: [ ] is New [X] Replaces one dated 04/01/2008




QUESTION:       The rule at 7105.1 (H.) says that we do not cover items and services covered by private
                health insurances. Do we cover items and services if the other insurance has denied
                them?

ANSWER:         We consider coverage under Medicaid rules if the other insurance denies because the
                item or service is not included in the coverage contract, is non-covered, or benefits
                are exhausted.
                 If the other insurance has denied for a reason other than not included in the coverage
                 contract, non-covered, or benefits exhausted, the beneficiary or provider must first
                 go through all required levels of the insurance plan’s appeal process, as well as the
                 external review from the Department of Banking, Insurance, Securities, and Health
                 Care Administration (BISHCA), if eligible and available. If the billed amount is less
                 than $100, BISHCA will not hear the appeal so the final insurance plan appeal is
                 sufficient (mental health appeals do not have the $100 threshold). The beneficiary must
                 meet the timeframes specified by BISHCA for the external appeal.
                 Medicare beneficiaries or their providers must appeal through the Qualified Independent
                 Contractor level prior to requesting that Medicaid cover the service or item.
                 If these appeals are all denied, the beneficiary’s provider may ask Medicaid to make
                 an independent assessment of coverage and medical necessity and, if approved, cover
                 the item or service. The Medicaid decision will be based on the same documentation
                 submitted for the previous appeals.
                 For beneficiaries covered by Medicare, the requirement to go through the Medicare
                 Qualified Independent Contractor appeal level applies with the exception of wheelchairs
                 that Medicare denies or downgrades. Upon documentation of the Medicare action,
                 Medicaid will make its own medical necessity and payment determination.




                                                                                                        12
Department of Vermont Health Access                                         Medicaid Covered Services Rules


                                         Medical Service Payments


7105        Medical Service Payments                    (04/01/2005, 05-09)

The department pays providers for Medicaid Services through a fiscal agent. To receive payment, the
provider must send a claim to the fiscal agent subject to the limitations and conditions specified in rules
7105.2-7108.3.

The department will reimburse a Medicaid recipient for his/her out-of-pocket expense for covered medical
services under the following conditions only:

   •     The recipient applied for benefits after February 15, 1973, and was denied; and
   •     The recipient was later granted Medicaid as a result of any review of the initial denial which
         resulted in its reversal (e.g. quality control review, supervisory review, SSI appeal, appeal and
         reversal by the Human Services Board, or any other identification of an error in the original
         determination which results in its reversal).

Reimbursement is for 100 percent of the out-of-pocket expenditures made by a recipient or a member of
his/her Medicaid group or a financially responsible relative who is not a member of the group, for
Medicaid-covered services provided between the date of eligibility (which may be as early as the first day
of the third month before the month of application) and the date the recipient's first Medicaid ID was made
available to him/her (when this date cannot be determined otherwise, use the second mail delivery day
following the date the first Medicaid ID was mailed). No copayment is due.

Payment cannot otherwise be made direct to a Medicaid recipient, even if he/she has already paid the
provider for a covered service. When Medicaid coverage is granted after bills have been paid (for
example, through application for retroactive coverage), the recipient may ask the provider to bill Medicaid
and refund the recipient's payment. If the provider agrees to do so, he/she must accept the Medicaid
allowance and refund the full amount of the recipient's payment (see also Provider Responsibility).

The fiscal agent sends a notice of Medicaid benefits paid to a sample of recipients who receive a service
each month. The recipient must report any disagreement with the notice to the department.

7105.1    General Exclusions      (02/01/2003, 02-33)

   No payment will be made for certain items and services including the following:

       A. Items and services not reasonable and necessary for the treatment or diagnosis of illness or
          injury, or to improve the functioning of a malformed body member.

       B. Items for which neither the beneficiary nor any other person or organization has a legal
          obligation to pay. This exclusion applies, for example, to X-rays or immunizations provided
          without charge to the general public by a health organization.

       C. Items and services furnished, paid for or authorized by an entity of the Federal Government.

       D. Care and services provided in a foreign country, except as provided in Medicare regulation 42
          CFR 424 Subpart H, which allows payment for emergency inpatient hospital care and related
          ambulance and physicians services if the following conditions are met:
            •    The beneficiary was present in the U. S. when the emergency arose, or was traveling to
                 Alaska by the most direct route without delay, and

                                                                                                              13
Department of Vermont Health Access                                        Medicaid Covered Services Rules


                                        Medical Service Payments


           •   The foreign hospital is closer to, or more accessible from the site of the emergency than the
               nearest U. S. hospital equipped to deal with and available to treat the individual's illness
               or injury.
     E.   Care and services ordered or prescribed by an immediate relative (see F) of the beneficiary.
     F.   Care and services furnished by an immediate relative of the beneficiary or by a facility, such as
          a nursing home, of which an immediate relative is owner or principal stockholder. For purposes
          of this section, "immediate relative" includes spouse; natural parent, child, and sibling; adopted
          child and parent; stepparent, stepchild, stepbrother and stepsister; father-in-law, mother-in-law,
          son-in-law, daughter-in-law, brother-in-law and sister-in-law; grandparent and grandchild.
     G. Items and services to the extent that payment has been or can be expected to be made under
        worker's compensation.
     H. Items and services covered by private health insurances.
     I.   Items and services ordered by an individual not enrolled as a Medicaid provider.
     J.   Premiums for health insurance plans when the department has not required the beneficiary to
          enroll or remain enrolled.
     K. Preliminary procedures or treatments leading to a service that is not covered by Medicaid.
     L.   Repair of items not covered by Medicaid.

7105.2    Provider Responsibility     (07/01/1991, 91-31)

   In order to assure the highest quality medical care and services, Medicaid payments are made only
   to providers meeting established Medicaid standards. Providers who are certified for participation
   in Medicare are automatically approved for Medicaid participation, providing no sanction has been
   imposed as provided in Violations of Provider Responsibility. Comparable standards for providers
   who do not participate in Medicare are established by State law and appropriate licensing and
   standard-setting authorities in the respective health and mental health fields. Additional specific
   requirements by provider type are contained in rules 7201-7608.

   Payment for covered services under Medicaid is limited to those services certified as medically
   necessary in the judgment of a qualified physician for the proper management, control, or treatment
   of an individual's medical problem and provided under the physician's direction and supervision.

   Providers agree to keep necessary records as required by Medicaid regulations and make them
   available to authorized State and Federal officials upon request.

   Medicaid payment rates are established for covered services. For certain services, a recipient
   copayment may be required for a portion of the Medicaid rate (see Obligation of Recipients).

   A provider must accept as payment in full the amounts paid in accordance with the rate schedule
   established for Medicaid. For example, a physician performing a particular surgical procedure may
   not request or receive any additional payment from the recipient, or anyone acting on the recipient's
   behalf, for the same surgical procedure, although in medical expenses spend-down cases, as specified
   by the Department for Children and Families, Economic Services Division, the recipient may be held
   responsible for a portion of the amount specified in the fee schedule (see rules 4400-4474.4).


                                                                                                          14
Department of Vermont Health Access                                        Medicaid Covered Services Rules


                                        Medical Service Payments


   No Medicaid payment will be made for claims received either by the Department or its fiscal agent
   later than six months following the date the service was provided, except when the delay has been
   caused by extenuating circumstances and authorization has been granted by the OVHA.

   When the recipient has other medical insurance, the benefits available must be applied prior to
   payment by Medicaid. In instances where other insurance companies have been billed, but not paid,
   claims may be submitted up to 12 months from the date of service.

   In no case will payment be made when more than 24 months have elapsed since the date of service. A
   provider must, as well, meet other commonly accepted standards of professional practice, including
   compliance with State and Federal anti-discrimination regulations.

   In all joint Medicare-Medicaid cases the provider of services must accept assignment of Medicare
   payment in order to receive payment from Medicaid of amounts not covered by Medicare.

   Claims and claims documentation as required must be submitted in a form acceptable to the OVHA
   or its designee.

7105.3   No Reassignment of Claims        (12/01/1980, 80-62)

   No payment for any care furnished to a recipient will be made to anyone other than the provider
   except that payment may be made in accordance with an assignment from the provider to a
   government agency or an assignment made pursuant to a court order (see also appeal process
   exception - rule 7105).

   With respect to physicians, dentists, or other individual practitioners payment may be made:
         To the employer, if the practitioner is required as a condition of his employment to turn over his
         fees to his employer; or
         To the facility in which the care or service was provided, if there is a contractual arrangement
         between the practitioner and that facility whereby the facility submits the claims for
         reimbursement; or
         To a foundation, plan, health maintenance or similar organization, which furnishes health care
         through an organized health care delivery system if there is a contractual arrangement between the
         organization and the person furnishing the service under which the organization bills or receives
         payments for such person's services.

   Payment will not be made to or through a factor, making claim by virtue of a power of attorney, sale,
   assignment or other transfer given by the provider to the factor. In this context a "factor" is an
   organization, collection agency, service bureau, or an individual that receives an added fee or a
   deduction of a portion of the face value of the accounts receivable in return for advancing money to a
   provider for his accounts receivable.




                                                                                                         15
Department of Vermont Health Access                                         Medicaid Covered Services Rules


                                    Violations of Provider Responsibility


7106       Violations of Provider Responsibility (04/01/1999, 98-11F)
Information from any source indicating that a provider is violating any of the policies set forth above shall
be transmitted to the department. The following describes the administrative actions and sanctions that the
department may take with regard to any provider participating in the Vermont Medicaid program. Taking
these actions, however, does not preclude subsequent or simultaneous civil or criminal court action.

7106.1    Definitions    (04/01/1999, 98-11F)

   "Provider" means any individual, firm, corporation, association or institution that is currently
   approved to provide medical assistance to a beneficiary pursuant to the Vermont Medicaid Program.

   "Person" means any natural person, company, firm, association, corporation or other legal entity.

   "Affiliates" means persons having an overt or covert relationship such that any one of them directly or
   indirectly controls or has the power to control another.

   "Administrative Agent" means an organization that processes and pays provider claims on behalf of
   the department.

   "Review Methods" means the methods by which the department or its administrative agent determines
   whether payment errors have been made.

   "Exclusion from participation" means termination of a provider's participation in the Vermont
   Medicaid Program, with the probability that it is permanent.

   "Suspension from participation" means temporary expulsion from participation in the Vermont
   Medicaid Program for a specified period of time or until specified conditions are met.

   "Deferment of payments" means the withholding of payments due a provider pending resolution of
   a specified problem. It may be taken or continued as a sanction or imposed as an administrative
   precaution upon discovery of a provider discrepancy.

   "Offsetting of payments" means a reduction or other adjustment of the amounts paid to a provider
   on deferred, pending, or future bills for purposes of recovering over-payments previously made
   to the provider.

   "Closed-end Medicaid provider agreement" means an agreement that is for a specified period of
   time not to exceed twelve months.

   "Open-end Medicaid provider agreement" means an agreement that has no specific termination date
   and continues in force as long as it is agreeable to both parties.

7106.2    Grounds for Sanctioning Providers       (04/01/1999, 98-11F)

   Sanctions may be imposed by the department against a provider for one or more of the following
   reasons.

      A. Presenting or causing to be presented for payment any false or fraudulent claim for care or
         services.


                                                                                                           16
Department of Vermont Health Access                                        Medicaid Covered Services Rules


                                   Violations of Provider Responsibility


     B. Submitting or causing to be submitted false information for the purpose of obtaining greater
        compensation than that to which the provider is legally entitled.
     C. Submitting or causing to be submitted false information for the purpose of meeting prior
        authorization requirements.
     D. Submitting a false or fraudulent application to obtain provider status.
     E. Failing to disclose or make available to the department or its authorized agent records of
        services provided to Medicaid beneficiaries and records of payments received for those
        services.
     F.   Failing to provide and maintain services to Medicaid beneficiaries within accepted medical
          community standards as adjudged by a body of peers.
     G. Failing to comply with the terms of the provider certification agreement that are printed on
        the Medicaid claim form.
     H. Over-utilizing the Medicaid program by inducing, furnishing or otherwise causing a
        beneficiary to receive care and services not required by the beneficiary.
     I.   Rebating or accepting a fee or portion of a fee or charge for a Medicaid patient referral.
     J.   Conviction of a criminal offense related to the practice of medicine resulting in death or
          injury to one or more patients.
     K. Failing to meet and maintain substantial compliance with all State and Federal regulations and
        statutes, applicable to the provider's profession, business or enterprise.
     L.   Termination or suspension from participation in Medicare.
     M. Suspension or termination from participation in other State or Federal programs such as
        Maternal and Child Health, etc.
     N. Documented practice of billing or collecting from the beneficiary an amount in addition to that
        received from Medicaid for that care or service.
     O. Failing to correct deficient provider operations after receiving written notice of these
        deficiencies from the department, other responsible State agencies, or their designees.
     P.   Formal reprimand or censure by an association of the provider's peers for unethical practices.
     Q. Failure to change or modify delivery patterns for care and services within a reasonable period
        from receipt of a request to do so by a peer review committee whose composition includes
        representation of the provider's peers.
     R. Presenting or causing to be presented for payment a disproportionate number of claims which
        are rejected or denied due to submission errors made by the provider or his or her agent. In
        this context disproportionate is determined in relation to providers of similar services.
     S.   Being convicted under any law relating to the Medicaid program or under any law of general
          applicability for acts arising out of the Medicaid program.

7106.3    Sanctions    (04/01/1999, 98-11F)

   One or more of the following sanctions may be invoked against providers based upon the grounds
   specified in rule 7106.2:


                                                                                                           17
Department of Vermont Health Access                                             Medicaid Covered Services Rules


                                      Violations of Provider Responsibility


         •    exclusion from participation in the Medicaid program;

         •    suspension from participation in the Medicaid program;

         •    deferment or offsetting of payments to a provider;

         •    transfer to a closed-end provider agreement not to exceed 12 months;

         •    mandatory attendance at provider information sessions;

         •    required prior authorization of service;

         •    100 percent review of the provider's claims prior to payment; or

         •    recovery of overpayment by offset or civil action, including recovery of reasonable interest
              and costs.

7106.4       Imposition and Extent of Sanctions     (04/01/1999, 98-11F)

   When the staff of the department determines that grounds exist and a provider sanction is being
   considered the department will advise the provider in writing, of the discrepancy noted. The contact
   with the provider will set forth in the case of mandatory sanctions (rule 7106.4.3), the extent and
   reason for the sanction, or in cases of discretionary sanctions:

         •    the nature of the discrepancy or inconsistency;

         •    the dollar value, if any, of such discrepancy or inconsistency;

         •    the method of computing such dollar values;

         •    that one or more sanctions may be taken;

         •    that the provider may, within 20 days from receipt of written notice, request a meeting with
              the Director of the OVHA to negotiate an amicable settlement of the discrepancy or request a
              commissioner's conference to be heard in the matter;

         •    that the provider may bring evidence, witnesses and representation of choice to either the
              meeting or conference as desired, or may submit a written statement to the Director or
              Commissioner for consideration in the decision to impose sanction; and

         •    that if a meeting or conference is not requested within the 20-day period, the decision regarding
              imposition of sanctions will be made based upon information at hand.

   Simultaneous with taking action to advise the provider as above, the department may defer payments
   on pending and future claims pending resolution of the discrepancy and shall so advise the provider if
   this action has been taken.

   If a mutually agreeable settlement is negotiated with the Director of the OVHA, formal sanction
   action is discontinued at this point. If not, at any point in the negotiation, at the discretion of either
   party, a commissioner's conference may be requested to resolve the issue.


                                                                                                                18
Department of Vermont Health Access                                          Medicaid Covered Services Rules


                                    Violations of Provider Responsibility


   If the provider prefers to bypass negotiation with the director and, within 20 days from receipt of
   written notice, does request a commissioner's conference in the matter at dispute, or negotiations are
   unsuccessful and a conference is requested, a date shall be set, with notice sent to all parties, and
   the conference conducted within 20 days from the date of request. The purpose of the conference
   shall be to assure that the commissioner has all pertinent information at hand prior to making a
   decision regarding imposition of sanctions. The provider may utilize any records, witnesses, or
   other information which will be helpful in achieving this purpose and may utilize legal or other
   representation in the presentation. The conference will be recorded and pertinent records retained by
   the department at least until the end of the appeal period, and if subsequent imposition of sanction is
   appealed, shall be made available to all parties as potential evidence in the conduct of the appeal
   hearing. If, after written notice as provided above, there has been no request from the provider for
   either a director's meeting or commissioner's conference at the end of 10 days, this shall be noted and
   the commissioner shall proceed, on the basis of information at hand, to imposition of sanctions as
   outlined in following sections.

 7106.4.1     Imposition of Sanctions
   The decision as to discretionary sanctions to be imposed shall be made by the commissioner.
   The following factors shall be considered in determining discretionary sanctions to be imposed:
       •    seriousness of the offense,
       •    extent of the violations,
       •    history of prior violations,
       •    prior imposition of sanctions,
       •    prior provision of provider information and training,
       •    provider willingness to adhere to program rules,
       •    agreement to make restitution,
       •    actions taken or recommended by peer groups or Licensing Boards, and
       •    whether a lessor sanction will be sufficient remedy.
   The following mandatory sanctions shall be applied by the commissioner effective as of the date of
   action requiring the sanction.
       •    When a provider has been suspended or terminated from the Medicare program, imposition of
            the same sanction as that imposed by Medicare is mandatory upon the commissioner by federal
            regulation. The only appeal is to the Medicare sanctioning authority.
       •    When a provider has been convicted of a violation under 33 VSA Chapter 26, Subchapter
            5 or under any Vermont statute of general applicability, and said conviction arises from or is
            directly related to the Medicaid program (33 VSA Ch 36), that provider will be suspended from
            further participation in the Medicaid program for a period of four years unless such suspension
            is specifically waived or reduced by the Secretary of Human Services.
       •    When a provider has failed to retain licensure, certification or registration which is required by
            state or federal law for participation in the Medicaid program, suspension from participation
            shall be imposed.


                                                                                                            19
Department of Vermont Health Access                                           Medicaid Covered Services Rules


                                      Violations of Provider Responsibility


 7106.4.2       Scope of Sanctions
   A sanction may be applied to all known affiliates of a provider, provided that each decision to include an
   affiliate is made on a case by case basis after giving due regard to all relevant facts and circumstances.
   The violation, failure or inadequacy of performance may be imputed to a person with whom the provider
   is affiliated where such conduct was accomplished within the course of his or her official duty or was
   effectuated by him or her with the knowledge or approval of such person.
   Suspension or exclusion from participation of any provider shall preclude such provider from
   submitting claims for payment, either personally or through claim submitted by any clinic, group,
   corporation or other association to the department or its fiscal agent for any services or supplies
   provided under the Medicaid program except for those services or supplies provided prior to the
   effective date of the suspension or exclusion.
   No clinic, group, corporation or other organization which is a provider of services shall submit claims
   for payment to the department or its administrative agent for any services or supplies provided by
   a person within such organization who has been suspended or excluded from participation in the
   Medicaid program except for those services and supplies provided prior to the effective date of the
   suspension or termination.
   When any provision of rule 7106.2, above is violated by a provider of services which is a clinic, group,
   corporation or other organization, the department may suspend or terminate such organization or any
   individual within said organization who is responsible for such violation.

 7106.4.3       Notice of Sanctions
   When a provider has been sanctioned, the commissioner or the commissioner's designee shall notify
   the provider in writing of the sanction imposed. The letter will also notify the provider of his right of
   appeal. The provider shall also be notified when a decision is made to take no sanctions.
   When a provider has been sanctioned, the commissioner shall notify as appropriate, the applicable
   professional society, Board of Registration or Licensure, and federal or state agencies of the findings
   made and the sanctions imposed.
   When a provider's participation in the Medicaid program has been suspended or terminated, the
   commissioner may notify the beneficiaries for whom the provider has submitted claims for services,
   that such provider has been suspended or terminated.

7106.5       Provider Information Program      (04/01/1999, 98-11F)

   When the sanction of mandatory attendance at provider information programs is a condition of
   continued participation, the department will notify the provider of time, date and place. These
   sessions may be scheduled as group sessions or as individual sessions at the discretion of the
   department and may include voluntary attendees as well as those required to attend under sanction.

   Provider Information Programs may include instructions relating to:
         •    claim form completion,
         •    use and format of provider manuals,
         •    use of appropriate procedure codes,
         •    key provisions of the Medicaid program,
         •    reimbursement rates and billing charges, and


                                                                                                           20
Department of Vermont Health Access                                          Medicaid Covered Services Rules


                                     Violations of Provider Responsibility


         •    how to inquire about coding or billing problems.

7106.6       Right of Appeal    (04/01/1999, 98-11F)

   The rights of appeal from mandatory sanctions are limited to the appeal rights inherent in the
   originating authority; i.e., the Medicare sanctioning authority, the courts, or licensing authority as
   appropriate to the cause for sanction.

   A provider may appeal a discretionary sanction within 10 days after notice of such sanction by
   requesting a hearing of the Secretary of the Agency of Human Services. Unless a timely request
   for hearing is received by the Secretary, the sanctions shall be considered final and binding. The
   sanctions imposed shall be suspended pending the outcome of the hearing; however, if payment on
   pending and future claims has been deferred pending resolution of the discrepancy, such deferment
   shall be continued.

   A hearing on the appeal shall be conducted within 30 days of the request, by the Secretary or a
   hearing officer appointed by the Secretary, under the same rules of conduct as in current use for
   hearings before the Human Services Board.

7106.7       Withholding Payments     (04/01/1999, 98-11F)

   In accordance with 42 C. F. R. 455.23, the department may withhold payment, in whole or in
   part, to a provider upon receipt of reliable evidence that; grounds for sanctioning a provider may
   exist as set forth in rule 7106.2. The Medicaid Fraud and Residential Abuse Unit (MFRAU) of
   the attorney general's office will review the evidence and determine whether there are reasonable
   grounds to believe that fraud or willful misrepresentation has occurred. If the MFRAU determines
   that reasonable grounds exist then the department may withhold payments without first notifying the
   provider of its intention to withhold such payments.

   The department shall send notice of its decision to withhold program payments within five days
   of taking such action. The notice must set forth the general allegations that form the basis of the
   withholding action. The notice shall also:

         •    state that payments are being withheld in accordance with this provision;
         •    state that the withholding is for a temporary period as stated in this section, and cite the
              circumstances under which withholding will be terminated;
         •    specify which Medicaid claims are affected by the withholding action; and
         •    inform the provider of the right to submit to the commissioner written evidence contradicting
              the allegations which formed the basis for the withholding action.

   Within ten days, the commissioner shall review the evidence submitted by the provider and determine
   whether the withholding of payments by the department under this section is warranted.

   All withholding of payment actions under this section will be temporary and will not continue after:

         •    the department and the Medicaid Fraud and Residential Abuse Unit of the Vermont
              Attorney General's Office determine that there is insufficient evidence of fraud or willful
              misrepresentation by the provider; or


                                                                                                            21
Department of Vermont Health Access                                       Medicaid Covered Services Rules


                                  Violations of Provider Responsibility


       •   legal proceedings related to the providers alleged fraud or willful misrepresentation are
           completed.

   The procedures relating to sanctions under the Medicaid program as delineated in rules 7106.4-7106.6
   shall not apply during the period of any withholding action under this section.




                                                                                                       22
Department of Vermont Health Access                                        Medicaid Covered Services Rules


                                            Utilization Control


7107       Utilization Control              (12/01/1980, 80-62)

The Department in accordance with 1902 (a) (30) of the Social Security Act, has implemented a statewide
utilization control program to safeguard against unnecessary or inappropriate utilization of services
available under Medicaid. Excessive or inappropriate use of service is identified through the utilization
review process and characterized as recipient abuse, provider abuse, or a combination thereof. Reports of
suspected abuse generated by Department staff, the medical community or the general public should be
referred to the OVHA.

7107.1   Beneficiary Abuse      (12/01/1980, 80-62)

   When recipient abuse is identified, the recipient's access to care will be limited through a requirement
   for prior authorization, restriction to selected providers, or other appropriate action. Instances of
   recipient abuse include, but are not limited to:
         Obtaining an inordinate supply of a prescription drug, especially those which are potentially
         addictive; or
         Consistently requesting care at a hospital emergency facility for non-emergency ailments; or
         Obtaining concurrent service from two or more practitioners for the same condition without
         medical referral, on an ongoing basis or for purpose of obtaining prescriptions necessary for the
         implementation of (i) above. This is not to preclude reasonable access to a "second opinion" of a
         diagnostic nature or taking action on such opinion.

7107.2   Provider Abuse      (12/01/1980, 80-62)

   When provider abuse is identified it may result in denial of payment, taking administrative action
   as provided in rule 7106, or the initiation of civil or criminal fraud action. Examples of provider
   abuse include, but are not limited to:
         Inducing, furnishing or otherwise causing a recipient to receive service not required for the
         recipient's care; or
         Submission of incorrect claims; or
         Excessive prescribing or dispensing of drugs, especially those which are potentially addictive or
         which are essentially irrelevant to the patient's care other than for their placebo effect.




                                                                                                          23
Department of Vermont Health Access                                          Medicaid Covered Services Rules


                                             Third Party Liability


7108        Third Party Liability               (02/01/2003, 02-33)

Medicaid is the payer of last resort, after all third party medical resources have been applied. A third party
is defined as one having an obligation to meet all or any portion of the medical expense incurred by the
beneficiary for the time such service was delivered. Such obligation is not discharged by virtue of being
undiscovered or undeveloped at the time a Medicaid claim is paid; it then becomes an issue of recovery
(see rule 7108.2). Medicaid beneficiaries are required to follow all rules of their third party insurance.
Medicaid will not pay claims that have been denied by the third party insurer for failure to follow their
rules. Some examples of third party medical resources are:
   •     Medicare;
   •     Health insurance, including health and accident but not that portion specifically designated for
         "income protection" which has been considered in determining beneficiary eligibility to participate
         in the Medicaid program;
   •     Medical coverage included in conjunction with other benefit or compensation programs such as
         military and veteran programs, and worker's compensation; and
   •     Liability for medical expenses as agreed or ordered in negligence suits, support settlements, trust
         funds, etc.

7108.1    Health Insurance Premiums        (02/01/2003, 02-33)

   The commissioner may elect at any time to require an applicant or beneficiary to enroll, or remain
   enrolled, in a private health insurance plan, provided that such enrollment meets the conditions
   specified in this section and in rule 4138.4 and, in the commissioners judgment, is likely to be
   cost-effective and in the department's best interest. If enrollment is required, the department will pay
   the individual's share of the health insurance premium.

   Once an individual has met this requirement by enrolling or remaining enrolled in a health insurance
   plan, Medicaid will cover the full array of Medicaid services and items, provided that the rules of
   their health insurance plan have been followed.

7108.2    Adjustment or Recovery        (02/01/2003, 02-33)

   The department may take action either before or after Medicaid payment of a claim to assure
   appropriate disbursement of Medicaid funds when payment turns out to be inappropriate due
   to subsequently discovered resources, fraud, error, or the development of third party-liability.
   Taking administrative action and accepting partial or full reimbursement shall not preclude either
   simultaneous or subsequent action in civil or criminal court as appropriate.

   The department may:

       A. negotiate adjustment or recovery on a voluntary basis with recipient, provider, or an obligated
          third party;
       B. accept adjustment or recovery in conjunction with the imposition of provider sanctions (see
          rule 7106.4);
       C. file a lien against any third party to recover Medicaid expenditures from any settlement,
          judgment, or other income that may be awarded through negligence liability action;

                                                                                                             24
Department of Vermont Health Access                                         Medicaid Covered Services Rules


                                            Third Party Liability


     D. enter direct civil action to effect adjustment or recovery when other efforts fail; or
     E. investigate and prepare for referral to the appropriate criminal prosecutor any case presumed
         subject to adjustment or recovery by way of such action.

   Providers may be required to enter a claim against any subsequently discovered health insurance
   resources previously unknown or overlooked and submit an adjusted Medicaid claim upon collection,
   with reimbursement as appropriate.

7108.3   Estate Recovery        (02/01/2003, 02-33)

   The department shall seek adjustment or recovery from the estates of individuals who died on or
   after January 1, 1994 provided that the individuals were 55 years of age or older when they
   received long-term care services paid for by the Medicaid program for nursing facility services,
   home-and-community-based waiver services, and related hospital and prescription drug services.
   Related hospital and prescription drug services are those paid for by the Medicaid program
   during a period of time when the individual is living in a nursing facility or enrolled in
   a home-and-community-based waiver program. Adjustment or recovery shall include amounts
   in personal needs accounts.

   The department will file a claim with the probate court as a creditor of the estate to recover its
   expenditures for long-term care services only after the death of an individual's surviving spouse, if
   any, and when the individual has no surviving child who is under age 21, or blind, or permanently and
   totally disabled as defined by the Social Security Administration.

 7108.3.1        Exemptions from Estate Recovery
   The department exempts the following assets from estate adjustment or recovery when an heir requests
   an exemption in writing no later than four months after the publication of notice to creditors of the
   estate.

     A. Homes in trust prior to December 1, 1997:
            The department normally recovers for long-term care Medicaid costs incurred after
            January 1, 1994. Individuals with homes in revocable trusts who received Medicaid
            payment of long-term care services before December 1, 1997, however, are exempt
            from recovery until after May 1, 1998, or, if later, the effective date of the first
            Medicaid eligibility review completed after December 1, 1997.
     B. When loss of assets would present an undue hardship:
            The department will not seek adjustment or recovery from assets when that
            adjustment or recovery would present an undue hardship to the decedents family
            members, as specified below and in rule 7108.3.
            1.   Income-producing assets
                  Undue hardship exists when adjustment or recovery from an income-producing asset
                  can be made only if the asset, alone or in combination with other related assets,
                  is sold and either or both of the following conditions are met:

                  a.   The assets sold are the sole source of income for the decedents spouse, parents,
                       children, or siblings.


                                                                                                          25
Department of Vermont Health Access                                          Medicaid Covered Services Rules


                                             Third Party Liability


                  b.    As a result of the sale, the decedents spouse, parents, children, or siblings would
                        qualify for public assistance (Reach Up benefits, SSI/AABD, general or emergency
                        assistance, or TANF or TANF/MOE benefits from another state).
     C. Estates with personal property valued at less than $2,000:
            The department will not seek recovery where the estate inventory filed with the probate
            court consists only of personal property that does not exceed $2,000 in value, such as
            home furnishings, apparel, personal effects, and household goods.
            The department will not seek to recover assets for which the department has
            imposed a penalty period of ineligibility for Medicaid coverage of long-term
            care services related to the transfer of those assets.

 7108.3.2        Hardship Exemptions for Homesteads
   At any time before closure of the probate estate, an heir may assert that adjustment or recovery against
   the homestead would be an undue hardship and that the homestead should be exempt from adjustment
   or recovery for the costs of Medicaid long-term care services. The department shall exempt a decedents
   home from estate adjustment or recovery based on undue hardship when one or more of the following
   three conditions have been established to the departments satisfaction.

     A. A sibling has been living in the home continuously for at least one year immediately before the
        date the decedent began receiving long-term care services.
     B. A son or daughter has been living in the home continuously for at least two years immediately
        prior to the date the decedent began receiving long-term care services and provided care
        that allowed the decedent to remain at home.
     C. Conditions (1), (2), and (3) below have been met.
            1.    The fair market value of the homestead is less than $250,000. If the fair market value of
                  the homestead exceeds this amount, the first $250,000 in fair market value shall be
                  exempt from estate recovery and any equity value in excess of $250,000 shall be subject
                  to the provisions of rule 7108.3.
            2.    A sibling or lineal heir of the deceased Medicaid beneficiary will inherit the homestead.
                  A lineal heir is a direct descendant, such as a child or grandchild.
            3.    The heir meets one or both of conditions (a) and (b) below.

                   a.   The heir has gross family income below 300 percent of the federal poverty level. No
                        income exclusions or deductions are allowed. The income of the persons presented
                        in the following table is included in the heirs gross family income, provided that
                        they are living in the heirs household.




                                                                                                              26
Department of Vermont Health Access                                                      Medicaid Covered Services Rules


                                                  Third Party Liability


                                                      Heir's Household

                                                                                             Family Members,
                                          Type of Heir
                                                                                     If Living in the Heirs Household
                                                                            Heir
                       Adult 18 years or older; or person younger than 18
                                                                            Heirs spouse or civil union partner
                       and emancipated
                                                                            Heirs biological or adoptive child or stepchild
                                                                            Heir
                                                                            Heirs parent
                       Person younger than 18 and not emancipated           Heirs stepparent
                                                                            Heirs biological or adoptive sibling, stepsibling, or
                                                                            half sibling, if younger than 18 and not emancipated


                 b. The heir demonstrates that significant services or financial support provided to the
                    deceased person by heirs meeting condition (2) or the spouses of such heirs enabled
                    the person to avoid long-term care or delay it at least six months. It is not necessary
                    for the deceased person to have been a Medicaid beneficiary when the services or
                    financial support were provided. Services may have been provided in combination
                    with services provided by governmental or other private entities.
                      To meet condition (b), the services or financial support must fall into
                      one or both of the following two categories:
                      i.    Medical or remedial care or support services that were:
                             •     medically necessary;
                             •     provided directly by the heir or the heir's spouse without compensation, or
                                   purchased with the heir's funds; and
                             •     provided while the deceased person required medical care and services
                                   consistent with the level of care standard for level III residential care homes
                                   at a frequency averaging no fewer than three times per week or, if provided
                                   less frequently, constituting the equivalent expenditure of time or money.
                            The department shall not verify the level of care unless it has a reasonable
                            basis for questioning that the level III standard was met.
                      ii.   Other services or financial support at least as significant as the care or services
                            described in category (i).
            When there are two or more heirs, the full value of the homestead is exempt from Medicaid
            estate adjustment or recovery only if each heir meets conditions (1), (2), and (3) above. When
            one or more heirs do not meet conditions (1), (2), and (3), the percentage of the value of the
            homestead corresponding to their share is subject to Medicaid estate adjustment or recovery.

 7108.3.3      Adjusting Claims Against Homesteads
   An estate includes all real and personal property and other assets listed on an inventory filed in the
   probate court. The probate court oversees the distribution of assets to heirs and the payment of the
   decedent's outstanding debts, which requires creditors to submit proof of their claims to the court.
   The probate court judge compares the total value of claims filed by creditors to the total value of
   available assets in the estate. The court determines which assets are available to pay debts.


                                                                                                                                    27
Department of Vermont Health Access                                         Medicaid Covered Services Rules


                                            Third Party Liability


   When any heir meets the department's undue hardship criteria as specified in rule 7108.3, some or all
   of these available assets may be exempt from adjustment or recovery by the department under these
   rules. Nonexempt assets are those subject to the department's claim because an heir has not met the
   undue hardship criteria. Creditors other than the department are not subject to these exemptions.
   When the total available assets are insufficient to pay all claims, the probate court prioritizes the debts
   and prorates each claim according to law. Each creditor collects the resulting percentage of its claim.
   If there are sufficient nonexempt assets to allow the department to collect its full percentage, it does
   so. If the nonexempt assets allow the department to collect only a partial amount of its share after the
   court's proration, it collects that amount. The department shall maintain its original claim so it can
   be prorated along with all other creditors claims according to law. The department notifies the court
   of its decision on the homestead exemption. If the department grants a homestead exemption, it shall
   inform the court of the maximum payment it will accept against its claim. The department determines
   the maximum payment it will accept by subtracting the amount of the exemption from the amount of
   the department's claim.

 7108.3.4     Retroactive Homestead Exemptions
   The undue hardship exemption applicable to homesteads shall be effective for any probate estate opened
   after June 30, 1999. Heirs seeking the exemption from July 1, 1999, through the effective date of
   this policy must submit their claim to the department's Coordination of Benefits unit in the Office of
   Vermont Health Access within 60 days following receipt of proper notice from the department. In the
   sole discretion of the commissioner, the department may make exceptions to the 60-day rule when an
   heir establishes undue hardship due to lack of notice, a medical need, or natural disaster. Heirs seeking
   an exemption from the 60-day submission requirement must sign an affidavit describing the condition
   that prevented them from complying with the 60-day submission requirement and submit the affidavit
   along with supporting documentation to the commissioner.

 7108.3.5     Long-Term Care Insurance Partnership Exemption
   The department will exempt assets or resources pursuant to rule 4242.2 in an amount equal to the
   insurance benefit payments that are made to or on behalf of an individual who is a beneficiary under
   a qualified State long-term care insurance partnership policy whether or not an heir requests an
   exemption.




                                                                                                            28
Department of Vermont Health Access                                        Medicaid Covered Services Rules


                                          Health Care Trust Fund


7109       Health Care Trust Fund                  (10/01/1995, 95-28)

In accordance with 33 VSA §1956, a Health Care Trust Fund is established in which proceeds from health
care provider taxes shall be deposited. The proceeds of other taxes designated by law and donations may
also be deposited in the fund.

Health care provider taxes shall be assessed upon hospitals, nursing homes and intermediate care facilities
for the mentally retarded (ICF/MRs) licensed in Vermont, pursuant to 33 VSA §1953, §1954, and §1955,
in an amount established by statute.

For each fiscal year in which health care provider taxes are due, the Office of Vermont Health Access
(OVHA) shall notify each provider of the amount of its assessment. The notification shall include the
appeals provisions set forth in 33 VSA §1958 and shall establish an assessment payment schedule for each
provider.

Payment in full of each installment must be sent to the OVHA post marked no later than the date specified
for each payment by the Director in the assessment notification. Late payments will be subject to a late
fee assessment of eight percent or $1,000, whichever is less. The filing of a request for reconsideration,
pursuant to 33 VSA §1958, does not relieve a provider from its obligation to make timely payments.

For hospital fiscal years ending after June 30, 1993, hospitals are required to identify gross inpatient
revenues as a separate footnote in their audited financial statement.




                                                                                                           29
                                 INTERPRETIVE MEMO
[X] Medicaid Covered Services Rule             [ ] Medicaid Covered Services Procedure
Interpretation                                                           Interpretation


This interpretive memo remains effective statewide until it is specifically supersededed-either by a
subsequent interpretive memo or by a contradictory rule with a later date.
Reference    7301.1 Date of this Memo 1/01/2014 Page 1 of 1
This Memo: [X] is New [ ] Replaces one dated




QUESTION:       Have there been any changes in Medicaid coverage of smoking cessation counseling?

ANSWER:          Yes. Effective January 1, 2014, the DVHA will cover face-to-face counseling for
                 smoking cessation for all Vermont Medicaid beneficiaries. The maximum number of
                 allowed visits per calendar year and qualified providers who can bill for counseling
                 remains unchanged.




                                                                                                        30
Department of Vermont Health Access                                            Medicaid Covered Services Rules


                                 Physicians and Other Licensed Practitioners


7301         Physicians and Other Licensed Practitioners                                (07/26/2012, 12-01)

Coverage of physician and other licensed practitioner services are limited to:
     Vermont physicians and other specified practitioners licensed by the appropriate licensing agency of
     the State; or
     Out-of-State physicians and other licensed practitioners affiliated with the hospitals included in the
     Green Mountain Care Network.
All other out-of-state physicians and other licensed practitioners are considered out-of-network and
non-emergent, non-urgent office visits are covered only if the service receives prior authorization.
Emergent and urgent care is defined in Medicaid Rule 7101.3.

For certain services, a recipient co-payment may be required for a portion of the Medicaid rate (see
Obligation of Recipients).

7301.1    Physician Services      (07/26/2012, 12-01)

   Covered physician services are those provided by a Doctor of Medicine (M.D.), Doctor of Osteopathic
   Medicine(D.O.), or Naturopathic Doctor (N.D.) when medically necessary and performed within
   the scope of their licenses.

   Routine physical exams, diagnostic services, immunizations, and certain injectable drugs are covered.

   Medical and surgical services provided in the home, office, hospital or nursing home are covered with
   limitations described in rule 7301.1.1.

   Supplies used in connection with a physician's treatment are included in the service; some examples of
   these supplies are tongue depressors, dextrosticks, bandages, antiseptics and other consumable items.

   Coverage of face-to-face counseling for smoking cessation for pregnant Vermont Medicaid
   beneficiaries is limited to 16 visits per calendar year. Services can be provided by physicians, nurse
   practitioners, licensed nurses, nurse midwives, and physician’s assistants. “Qualified” Tobacco
   Cessation Counselors are also allowed (requires at least eight hours of training in tobacco cessation
   services from an accredited institute of higher education).

  7301.1.1    Physician Visits
   Coverage for physician visits is limited in the following manner:
         Office visits - up to five visits per month;
         Home visits - up to five visits per month;
         Nursing facility visits - up to one visit per week;
         Hospital visits - up to one visit per day for acute care, limited to the direct services of a physician,
         a physician’s assistant, or nurse-midwife.
   Visits in excess of those listed above may be covered if there is a significant change in the health status
   of the patient that requires more frequent visits; prior authorization is required for visits in excess of
   the limits listed above.

                                                                                                                31
Department of Vermont Health Access                                           Medicaid Covered Services Rules


                                Physicians and Other Licensed Practitioners


   Coverage for surgery services includes postoperative care limited to evaluation and management
   services compliant with Medicare global-day recommendations.

 7301.1.2     Nurse Practitioners
   Coverage is limited to enrolled nurse practitioners in either independent practice or affiliated with a
   physician when certified as: 1) a Nurse-Midwife or 2) a Family Nurse Practitioner or 3) a Pediatric
   Nurse Practitioner and is limited to Medicaid covered services contained in protocols reviewed and
   accepted by the Vermont State Board of Nursing and the Vermont State Board of Medical Practice.

7301.2   Psychiatric Services     (07/26/2012, 12-01)

   Psychiatric services are covered as physician's services for treatment of mental, psychoneurotic, or
   personality disorders, as defined in the American Psychiatric Association's "Diagnostic and Statistical
   Manual - Mental Disorders.”

 7301.2.1     Psychologists Practicing Independently
   Diagnostic tests performed by a qualified Vermont psychologist practicing independently of an
   institution, agency, or physician's office are covered. A "qualified" psychologist is one practicing in
   the state who has been approved for participation in Medicare by the Part B Carrier or who is licensed
   in accordance with 26 V. S. A. Chapter 55.
   Psychological evaluation includes interviewing, testing, scoring, evaluation and a written report. Group
   therapy is limited to no more than three sessions per week. Reimbursement is limited to one session
   per day per group and no more than 10 patients in a group.

 7301.2.2     Non-Covered Services
   Psychotherapy or diagnostic tests provided by a psychologist practicing independently to an inpatient
   or outpatient of general hospital or mental hospital or in a community mental health clinic are not
   covered.

7301.3   Reimbursement       (07/26/2012, 12-01)

   Reimbursement for physicians and other licensed practitioners is described in the Provider Manual.




                                                                                                           32
Department of Vermont Health Access                                          Medicaid Covered Services Rules


                                       Rehabilitative Therapy Services


7317        Rehabilitative Therapy Services                       (02/26/2011, 10-13)

Rehabilitative Therapy services include diagnostic evaluations and therapeutic interventions that are
designed to improve, develop, correct, prevent the worsening of, or rehabilitate functions that affect the
activities of daily living that have been lost, impaired, or reduced as a result of acute or chronic medical
conditions, congenital anomalies, or injuries. Rehabilitative Therapies include Occupational Therapy
(OT), Physical Therapy (PT), and Speech Therapy (ST) (also called Speech/Language Therapy or Speech
Language Pathology). The definition and meanings of Occupational Therapy, Physical Therapy, and
Speech Therapy can be found in the State Practice Acts at 26 V.S.A. §2081a, §3351, and §4451.

Rehabilitative Therapy services must be:
   •     directly related to an active treatment regimen designed by the physician; and
   •     of such a level of complexity and sophistication that the judgment, knowledge, and skills of a
         qualified therapist are required; and
   •     reasonable and necessary under accepted standards of medical practice to the treatment of the
         patient’s condition.

                                                   NOTE
                        Not all services listed in the State Practice Acts are medical
                        in nature. Medicaid only covers medically necessary
                        rehabilitative therapy services. Medical necessity is defined
                        in Rule 7103.

7317.1    Limitations     (05/01/2012, 11-19)

   Quantity limits on services are on a per beneficiary basis, regardless of program or coverage source.
   Changing programs and/or eligibility during a calendar year does not reset the number of available
   visits.

   These service limitations and prior authorization requirements are not applicable when Medicare
   is the primary payer.

       A. Rehabilitative Therapy Services for Beneficiaries Age 21 and Older
           Thirty (30) therapy visits per calendar year are covered and include any combination
           of physical therapy, occupational therapy and speech/language therapy.
           Prior authorization beyond 30 therapy visits in a calendar year will only
           be granted to beneficiaries with the following diagnoses, and only if the
           beneficiary meets the criteria found in Rule 7317:
            •    Spinal Cord Injury
            •    Traumatic Brain Injury
            •    Stroke
            •    Amputation
            •    Severe Burn
       B. Rehabilitative Therapy Services for Beneficiaries Under Age 21

                                                                                                           33
Department of Vermont Health Access                                               Medicaid Covered Services Rules


                                          Rehabilitative Therapy Services


              Eight (8) therapy visits from the start of care date per diagnosis/condition for each type
              (physical therapy, occupational therapy, and speech/language therapy) are covered based
              on a physician’s order. Provision of therapy services beyond the initial 8 visits is subject
              to prior authorization review as specified below (Rule 7317.2).

7317.2       Prior Authorization Requirements:   (02/26/2011, 10-13)

   Prior authorization is defined in Rules 7102-7102.4.

   To receive prior authorization for additional services a physician must submit a written request to
   the department with pertinent clinical data showing the need for continued treatment, projected
   goals and estimated length of time.

7317.3       Rehabilitative Therapy Services: Home Health   (02/26/2011, 10-13)

   Rehabilitative therapy services provided by a home health agency are covered for up to four months
   based on a physician’s order, for beneficiaries of any age. Provision of therapy services beyond the
   initial four-month period is subject to prior authorization review as specified below.

   Prior Authorization Requirements:

   In making its prior authorization decision, the DVHA will obtain and take into consideration a
   qualified therapist’s assessment when determining whether the service may be reasonably provided by
   the patient’s support person(s). In addition, when the department has determined that therapy services
   may be reasonably provided by the patient’s support person(s) and the patient otherwise meets the
   criteria for authorization of therapy services beyond the initial four-month period, professional
   oversight of the support person’s provision of these services is covered, provided such oversight is
   medically necessary.

   Prior authorization for rehabilitative therapy services beyond one year will be granted only:
         •     if the service may not be reasonable provided by the patient’s support person(s), or
         •     if the patient undergoes another acute care episode or injury, or
         •     if th epatient experiences increased loss of function, or
         •     if deterioration of the patient’s condition requiring therapy is imminent and predictable.




                                                                                                               34
Department of Vermont Health Access                                          Medicaid Covered Services Rules


                                               Clinic Services


7403       Clinic Services             (10/02/1984, 84-46)

Covered clinic services include the following:
     Covered physicians' services billed by the clinic on the physician's behalf under an agreement with
     the physician; and
     Services and medical supplies furnished by the clinic incident to covered physicians' services.

7403.1   Mental Health Clinics        (10/02/1984, 84-46)

   For policies, amount, duration and scope of benefits, and reimbursement rates, see the Department
   of Mental Health regulations #8l-A20. The Department of Mental Health is also responsible for
   determining provider eligibility as a Community Mental Health Clinic.

7403.2   Indian Health Service Facilities     (10/02/1984, 84-46)

   Indian Health Service facilities are accepted as providers on the same basis as other qualified
   providers. The facility need not obtain a license, but must meet all applicable standards for licensure.

7403.3   Rural Health Clinics      (12/01/1980, 80-62)

   Coverage is limited to rural health clinics which have been certified for participation in Medicare as
   evidenced by a current agreement signed by the Secretary of HHS.

   Reimbursable rural health clinic services are:
         Services performed by a physician who is employed by the clinic to provide such services; and
         Services and supplies incident to a physician's service if they are of a type commonly furnished
         in physicians' offices; of a type commonly rendered either without charge or included in the rural
         health clinic's bill; furnished as an incidental, although integral, part of a physician's service;
         furnished under the direct, personal supervision of a physician; and, in the case of a service,
         furnished by a member of the clinic's health care staff. Only drugs and biologicals which cannot
         be self-administered are included in this benefit (see rule 7501 for pharmaceutical items); and
         Nurse practitioner and physician assistant services if they are furnished by a qualified professional
         employed by the clinic; furnished under the medical supervision of a physician; furnished in
         accordance with medical orders prepared by a physician; of a type the practitioner is legally
         permitted to perform in the State; and of a type that would be coverable if furnished by a physician;
         and
         Services and supplies incident to a nurse practitioner's or physician assistant's services if they
         are of a type commonly furnished in physicians' offices; of a type commonly rendered either
         without charge or included in the clinic's bill; furnished as an incidental, although integral, part
         of professional services of a nurse practitioner or physician assistant service; furnished under
         direct personal supervision of a nurse practitioner or physician assistant; and, in the case of a
         service, furnished by a member of the clinic's health care staff. Only drugs and biologicals which
         cannot be self-administered are included in this benefit (see rule 7501 for pharmaceutical items).

   Payment for rural health clinic services will be made in accordance with rates established for purposes
   of reimbursement under Medicare as provided in 42 CFR 405.2425.

                                                                                                            35
Department of Vermont Health Access                                          Medicaid Covered Services Rules


                                        Laboratory and Radiology Services


7405           Laboratory and Radiology Services                        (02/26/2011, 10-13)

Services Covered laboratory and radiology services include the following:
   •     Microbiological, serological, hematological and pathological examinations; and
   •     Diagnostic and therapeutic imaging services; and
   •     Electro-encephalograms, electrocardiograms, basal metabolism readings, respiratory and cardiac
         evaluations.
Coverage is extended to independent laboratories and radiological services approved for Medicare
participation for services provided under the direction of a physician and certification that the services are
medically necessary.

When the place of service is "hospital inpatient", coverage for the technical component is included in the
per diem hospital reimbursement. When the place of service is "hospital outpatient", coverage is included
in the hospital reimbursement on the outpatient claim form for the technical component. Reimbursement
for the professional component will be made only to a physician.

Anatomic pathology services form an exception to the place of service and component coverage. Total
procedure codes may be used for anatomic pathology services performed by a laboratory outside the
hospital in which the beneficiary is an inpatient or for an independent laboratory performing tests for
registered inpatients.

7405.1       Limitations:   (02/26/2011, 10-13)

   Laboratory services for urine drug testing is limited to eight (8) tests per calendar month for
   beneficiaries age 21 and older. This limitation applies to tests provided by professionals, independent
   labs and hospital labs for outpatients.

7405.2       Prior Authorization - Radiology:     (02/26/2011, 10-13)

   The following outpatient high-tech imaging services require prior authorization:
         •     computed tomography (CT) (previously referred to as CAT scan);
         •     computed tomographic angiography (CTA);
         •     magnetic resonance imaging (MRI);
         •     magnetic resonance angiography (MRA);
         •     positron emission tomography (PET); and
         •     positron emission tomography-computed tomography (PET/CT).

   The following imaging services do not require prior authorization:
         •     those provided during an inpatient admission;
         •     those provided as part of an emergency room visit;
         •     x-rays, including dual x-ray absorptiometry (DXA) images;
         •     ultrasounds; or

                                                                                                             36
Department of Vermont Health Access                                         Medicaid Covered Services Rules


                                        Laboratory and Radiology Services


         •     mammograms.

7405.3       Prior Authorization - Laboratory:   (02/26/2011, 10-13)

   Exceptions to the limitations in Rule 7504.1 must be prior approved.




                                                                                                         37
Department of Vermont Health Access                                         Medicaid Covered Services Rules


                                      Private Non-Medical Institutions


7411        Private Non-Medical Institutions (07/01/1999, 99-12)
A Private Non-Medical Institution (PNMI) is a facility that provides medical care to its residents. The
facility is enrolled as a Medicaid provider and receives Medicaid reimbursement for the actual medical
services that are provided to Medicaid beneficiaries residing in the facility. This definition of a PNMI is
consistent with federal regulations at 42 CFR § 434.2.

7411.1    Residential Child Care Facilities    (07/01/1999, 99-12)

   These facilities are residential child care facilities that are maintained and operated for the provision
   of child care services, as defined in 33 VSA § 306, and are licensed by the Department for Children
   and Families under the "Licensing Regulations for Residential Child Care Facilities".

   Services may be provided by physicians, psychologists, R.N.s, L.P.N.s, speech therapists,
   occupational therapists, physical therapists, licensed substance abuse counselors, Masters degree
   social workers, and other qualified staff carrying out a plan of care. Such plans of care, or initial
   assessments of the need for services, must be prescribed by a physician, psychologist, or other
   licensed practitioner of the healing arts within the scope of his/her practice under State law.

7411.2    Prior Authorization    (07/01/1999, 99-12)

   All admissions to private non-medical institutions for which Medicaid reimbursement is anticipated
   must be prior authorized by the placing agency, i.e., the Department for Children and Families, the
   Department Mental Health, the Department of Disabilities, Aging and Independent Living, or the
   Department of Education or Local Education Agency.

7411.3    Reimbursement      (07/01/1999, 99-12)

   Reimbursement for these services is made at per diem rates based on a cost-based prospective rate
   setting system as described in the Private Non-Medical Institution section of the Medicaid Practices
   and Procedures Manual. Such rates include the following three components:

      A. treatment,
      B. room, board, and supervision
      C. education.

   No Medicaid reimbursement is made for the room and board or educational components of the rates.

7411.4    Assistive Community Care Facilities      (07/01/1999, 99-12)

   These PMNI facilities must be licensed by the Department of Disabilities, Aging and Independent
   Living as level III residential care homes and must be in good standing with the licensing agency in
   order to become a certified Medicaid provider.

   The medical services provided in an Assistive Community Care facility include:



                                                                                                           38
Department of Vermont Health Access                                         Medicaid Covered Services Rules


                                      Private Non-Medical Institutions


   Case Management: Case management assists residents in gaining access to needed medical, social,
   and other services in order to promote the residents independence in the facility. In addition case
   management includes coordinating referrals required to link the resident and family to services
   specified in the residents plan of care, and consultation to providers and support person(s).

   Assistance with the Performance of Activities of Daily Living: Assistance with the performance of
   activities of daily living includes help with meals, dressing, movement, bathing, grooming, or other
   personal needs.

   Medication Assistance, Monitoring and Administration: Medication assistance, monitoring and
   administration include those activities defined and described in the Vermont Residential Care Home
   Licensing Regulations adopted 10/7/93 at 2.2b, 2.2.a, and 5.9 (see pages 3, and 25 - 31).

   24-hour On-site Assistive Therapy: Assistive therapy includes activities, techniques or methods
   designed to improve cognitive skills or modify behavior. Assistive therapy is furnished in consultation
   with a licensed professional, such as a registered or practical nurse, physician, psychologist, mental
   health counselor, clinical social worker, qualified mental retardation professional (QMRP), or
   special educator.

   Restorative Nursing: Restorative nursing includes services that promote and maintain function.
   Restorative nursing services are specified in the residents service plan and may be provided in
   a group setting.

   Nursing Assessment: Nursing assessment includes completion of an initial and periodic re-assessment
   of the resident, and other skilled professional nursing activities that include evaluation and monitoring
   of resident health conditions and care planning interventions to meet a residents needs at the times
   specified by the Vermont Residential Care Home Licensing Regulations for Level III residential
   care homes.

   Health Monitoring: Health monitoring includes resident observation and appropriate reporting or
   follow-up action by residential care home staff, in accordance with the Residential Care Home
   Licensing Regulations adopted 10/7/1993.

   Routine Nursing Tasks: Routine nursing tasks are performed by trained personal care or nursing staff
   with overview from a licensed registered nurse in accordance with the Vermont Residential Care
   Home Licensing Regulations adopted 10/7/1993 and the Vermont Nurse Practice Act. Assistive
   Community Care Services reimbursement is not designed to compensate for care which requires a
   variance under the Vermont Residential Care Home Licensing Regulations adopted 10/7/1993, or
   which cannot be performed while meeting the needs of the total resident population of a home.

7411.5   Reimbursement       (07/01/1999, 99-12)

   Reimbursement for assistive community care services is made at a single per diem rate for all
   residential care homes enrolled in Medicaid to provide this service. This reimbursement does not
   cover room and board services provided to Medicaid beneficiaries.




                                                                                                           39
Department of Vermont Health Access                                          Medicaid Covered Services Rules


                                         Long-Term Care Services


7601       Long-Term Care Services                    (02/06/10, 09-07)

These regulations apply to all long-term care services for Medicaid beneficiaries of any age. For
beneficiaries age 18 or over, regulations promulgated by the Department of Disabilities, Aging and
Independent Living (DAIL) “Choices for Care 1115 Long-Term Care Medicaid Waiver” program (Social
Security Act Section 1115 Demonstration Project Number 11-W-00191/1) shall be controlling if they
conflict with the provisions in this chapter (7601-7606).

The Medicaid Program (Title XIX) includes long-term care services provided to eligible beneficiaries in
the following settings.

  A. Nursing Facilities (NF’s)
       A Nursing Facility provides, directly or by contract, room, board, skilled nursing and rehabilitation
       services on a 24-hour a day basis to assist beneficiaries to reach their optimal level of functioning.
       All nursing facilities, pursuant to Section 1910(2) of the Social Security Act, have been certified
       for participation in Medicare, or if not participating in Medicare, have been continuously
       certified since July 1, 1980 for participation as a nursing facility as evidenced by a valid
       certification agreement on file with the Office of Vermont Health Access.
       An out-of-state nursing facility must be participating in that state's Medicaid program as well as
       enrolled as a Vermont Medicaid provider. An in-state nursing facility (or distinct part of a facility)
       must be licensed by DAIL and enrolled as a Vermont Medicaid provider, in order to be reimbursed.
          (1) Rehabilitation Center Services
            Coverage of rehabilitation center services is limited to Medicare-certified nursing facilities,
            licensed by, and approved for participation by the state in which the facility is located
            and enrolled as a Vermont Medicaid provider. These services include intensive sensory
            stimulation; intensive physical, speech and occupational therapy; adjustment counseling;
            training in the use of prosthetics, orthotics and durable medical equipment; and other
            medical services needed to improve the patient's daily living skills and/or to facilitate
            recuperation from disease, injury or medical event. Care must be supervised by physician
            specialists. The purpose of rehabilitation center services is to restore a beneficiary's
            functional abilities to the highest practical level of physical and/or mental self-sufficiency
            which will prepare the beneficiary for discharge. The discharge plan will provide for
            the active participation and training of family members, if appropriate.
            Coverage is limited to one year unless an extension beyond one year is granted by
            DAIL when documented medical evidence shows that the beneficiary is continuing
            to demonstrate significant physical and/or mental progress and can reasonably be
            expected to be discharged to the setting for care established in the discharge plan.
            Under no condition will authorization be made beyond two years.
  B. Intermediate Care Facilities for the Mentally Retarded (ICF/MR's)
      A public or private institution (or distinct part thereof) certified for CMS participation by
      DAIL’s Division of Licensing and Protection, for the provision of Intermediate Care Facility
      services for the Mentally Retarded (ICF/MR) as evidenced by a valid certification agreement
      on file with the Office of Vermont Health Access executed under 1902(a)(27) of the Social
      Security Act and 42 CFR 442, Subparts A, B, C, E and G. An ICF/MR provides, directly or
      by contract, health-related care and services to individuals with mental retardation.
  C. Home and Community-Based Services

                                                                                                              40
Department of Vermont Health Access                                       Medicaid Covered Services Rules


                                        Long-Term Care Services


       Home and Community-Based Services include long-term care services provided in a home
       setting or an enhanced residential care setting. An individualized written service plan shall
       be developed for each participant. Services may include assistance with Activities of Daily
       Living, Instrumental Activities of Daily Living, Adult Day Service, Respite, Companion
       Service, Personal Emergency Response System, Home Modification/Assistive Devices, and
       other such services as DAIL may include (Choices for Care Regulations).




                                                                                                       41
Department of Vermont Health Access                                          Medicaid Covered Services Rules


                                         Supplementation Prohibition


7602        Supplementation Prohibition                       (02/06/10, 09-07)

Federal regulations require all Medicaid providers of long-term care services to accept the Medicaid
payment as payment in full. For example, if a facility elects to serve Medicaid beneficiaries and the
facility’s customary charge for a semi-private room is $250.00, but the Medicaid payment is $200.00
per day, the Medicaid payment must be accepted as payment in full. The facility cannot collect any
supplemental amount for the semi-private room from the beneficiary or anyone else acting on behalf of
the beneficiary. If the beneficiary, or anyone acting on behalf of the beneficiary, wishes to have a private
room, the facility cannot charge more than the difference between the charges for a semi-private and a
private room. In no case can the total payments for a private room exceed the charge for a private room.

Federal regulations also describe specific items and services for which a facility may charge residents
extra. Beyond these items and services, supplementation by the beneficiary, family, friends or any other
source is prohibited.

Federal regulations also require that Medicaid beneficiaries be informed, in writing, by the facility, at the
time of admission to the nursing facility or when they become eligible for Medicaid, of the items and
services that the facility offers and for which the beneficiary may be charged, as well as the amount of
charges for those services. The Division of Licensing and Protection within the DAIL is responsible for
enforcing this regulation.




                                                                                                            42
Department of Vermont Health Access                                              Medicaid Covered Services Rules


                                       Services Covered in a Nursing Facility


7603           Services Covered in a Nursing Facility                           (02/06/10, 09-07)

The following covered services are included in the per diem rates for nursing facilities.

  A. Room and board;

  B. Required nursing services (except private duty nurses);

  C. Therapy services (physical, occupational, inhalation, recreational, etc.) furnished on the premises
     by staff employed by the facility;

  D. Modification of diet (i.e., salt-free, low-fat, diabetic and other special diets and including sugar
     substitutes and food supplements).

  E. Other special care services including, but not limited to: handfeeding, incontinence care, total
     care, full-time care, etc.;

  F.      Washing personal clothing and provision of clean bedding;

  G. Bathroom supplies including toothbrush, comb, soap, shampoo, tissue, rubbing alcohol,
     toothpaste, lotions, talcums and similar preparations used in daily care;

  H. Bedding, sheets, disposable pads, etc.;

  I.      All prescribed over-the-counter drugs;

  J.      Sterile water, saline solution, etc.;

  K. All medical supply items ordered by the physician; and

  L.      Use of durable medical equipment with whatever frequency is medically indicated.

7603.1       Drugs in a Long-Term Care Facilities       (02/06/10, 09-07)

       For those Medicaid beneficiaries entitled to Medicare Part A or enrolled in Medicare Part B and
       enrolled in a Medicare prescription drug plan, this section applies only to drugs not included in a
       Medicare-covered prescription drug class.

       Drugs prescribed by the attending physician for a beneficiary in a nursing facility or an ICF/MR are
       covered in the same manner as for a beneficiary living in the community. Covered drugs are those
       available only with a prescription, obtained from a participating pharmacy, and billed directly by that
       pharmacy to the Medicaid fiscal agent; the pharmacy cannot bill the nursing facility and the facility
       then re-bill Medicaid. An exception is made for a Medicare-participating nursing facility which
       must collect first from Part A for covered drugs supplied as an ancillary service during the period a
       beneficiary is receiving nursing facility benefits under Medicare Part A.

       All prescribed over-the-counter drugs for their residents are to be furnished by each nursing facility or
       ICF/MR. The facility will obtain these drugs from a pharmacy or drug wholesaler and enter the
       charges incurred in the cost report submitted for purposes of calculating the per diem rate. The facility
       shall not make a charge either to the program or to the beneficiary for prescribed over-the-counter
       drugs.

                                                                                                              43
Department of Vermont Health Access                                         Medicaid Covered Services Rules


                                   Services Covered in a Nursing Facility


   A pharmacy may, however, receive payment directly from a nursing facility or ICF/MR for
   reasonable costs incurred for unit dose or other systems, consulting services, or other costs incurred
   by the pharmacy in complying with Medicaid Rule 7501.7 and the facility shall include this cost
   in its cost report.

7603.2    Personal Comfort Items      (02/06/10, 09-07)

   Radio, television, telephone, air conditioners, beauty and barber services, and similar personal comfort
   items are excluded from coverage under Medicaid. The beneficiary may be charged for any personal
   comfort item when the beneficiary has requested it and has been advised that he or she will be charged.

   The facility may also charge the beneficiary for store items secured on the beneficiary's behalf such as
   magazines, newspapers, candy, tobacco, dry cleaning, denture cream, hairbrush, and deodorant.

7603.3    Ancillary Services in a Nursing Facility    (02/06/10, 09-07)

   A nursing facility participating in Medicare must bill under Medicare Part B for the following
   services provided to beneficiaries when that beneficiary has exhausted his or her extended care
   coverage under Medicare Part A. For beneficiaries not covered by Medicare, billing Medicaid for
   these ancillary services is allowed.

     A. diagnostic X-ray, diagnostic laboratory and other diagnostic tests;
     B. X-ray, radium and radioactive isotope therapy;
     C. surgical dressings, splints, cast and other devices used to reduce fractures;
     D. prosthetic devices;
     E.   leg, arm, back and neck braces;
     F.   "outpatient" physical therapy and speech therapy services. Payment for outpatient physical
          therapy and speech therapy services requires certification by a physician that:
             (1) Therapy services are or were required on an outpatient basis; and
           (2) A plan for furnishing the therapy services is or was established and reviewed periodically
               by the physician; and
           (3) The services are or were furnished while the patient was under care of a physician.
           Therapy services furnished by a provider’s employees to its residents may
           not be billed as outpatient services.
           A nursing facility participating in Medicare may provide, under arrangements with another
           provider, certain covered outpatient services to its residents. Under the arrangements the
           nursing facility must exercise professional responsibility over the arranged-for services. The
           services would be treated just as though they were furnished directly by the nursing facility.




                                                                                                            44
Department of Vermont Health Access                                           Medicaid Covered Services Rules


                                            Duration of Coverage


7604        Duration of Coverage                 (02/06/10, 09-07)

Payment on behalf of an eligible beneficiary, for the period(s) the beneficiary is determined to be in need of
institutional care, will begin on admission to the facility or the first day of Medicaid eligibility, whichever
is later. Payment will end on the day before the day of discharge or death, the last day the beneficiary is
determined to need institutional care or the last day of eligibility, whichever is earliest.

Payment will end for any absence from a facility for an inpatient stay in another medical facility (i.e.,
hospital, psychiatric hospital, another nursing facility except as provided below (7604.1.B).

7604.1    Leave of Absence from a Nursing Facility        (02/06/10, 09-07)

      A. Home Visit
           Payment to a nursing facility on behalf of an eligible Medicaid beneficiary is continued
           during an absence for the purpose of a "home visit" (not including hospital stays) for up to
           24 home visit days in a calendar year. A home visit is defined as a visit that includes an
           overnight stay. Such absences must be included in the beneficiary’s plan of care.
      B. Hospitalization
           Pursuant to the Nursing Home Residents' Bill of Rights (33 VSA §§ 7301-7306), a Medicaid
           beneficiary has the right to retain his or her bed in a nursing facility while absent from the
           facility due to hospitalization provided such absence does not exceed ten (10) successive days.
           Medicaid payment will be made to a nursing facility that is not a swing bed facility for up to a
           maximum of six (6) successive days when the bed of a beneficiary is retained because the
           beneficiary is admitted as an inpatient to a hospital subject to the following conditions:
              (1) the nursing facility would otherwise be at its maximum licensed occupancy if the
                operator were not obligated to hold the bed open,
            (2) the beneficiary continues to meet Medicaid eligibility criteria,
            (3) the beneficiary has been an inpatient resident of the nursing facility and was admitted
                directly to the hospital.
            (4) the nursing facility has a valid provider agreement in effect on the dates of service for
                which payment is made,
            (5) the beneficiary's attending physician attests that the beneficiary is expected to be
                readmitted to the nursing facility from the hospital in ten (10) days or less, or, upon notice
                supplied by the hospital discharge planning unit to the nursing facility that the beneficiary
                will be discharged with an absence which shall not exceed ten successive days, and
            (6) documentation as required above (#3) above is provided to OVHA, and is on file at
                the nursing facility.
           Payment for the days the bed is retained for the beneficiary will be made at the
           certified Medicaid per diem rates established for the nursing facility reduced
           by the amount, if any, of the beneficiary's share.
           No payment will be made when a physician or hospital discharge planning unit
           makes a determination that the beneficiary will be hospitalized for more than ten (10)
           successive days, will never return to the nursing facility, or the beneficiary or legal
           representative agree to waive the right to have his or her bed retained.


                                                                                                             45
Department of Vermont Health Access                                        Medicaid Covered Services Rules


                                          Duration of Coverage


          When a redetermination about the length of stay is made because of a change in the
          beneficiary's medical condition, payment will be made in accordance with the redetermination.
          Each day reimbursed under this regulation is counted as a patient day for cost reporting
          purposes and must be reported separately from home visit days.

7604.2    Leave of Absence from an ICF/MR         (02/06/10, 09-07)

   Payments to an ICF/MR on behalf of an eligible beneficiary is continued for an absence of up to
   fifteen (15) days per quarter or sixty (60) days per year for the purpose of "home visit" providing it
   is consistent with and part of the beneficiary's current service agreement. Approval for an absence
   for the purpose of a "home visit" in excess of fifteen (15) days per quarter or sixty (60) days per
   year shall be obtained in advance from DAIL.

   Medicaid payment shall be made to an ICF/MR for an eligible beneficiary during a leave of absence,
   subject to the following conditions:

     A. Any day for which the facility is paid to hold a bed open must be counted as a patient day
        and the revenue must be accounted for as a patient revenue.
     B. The day of departure shall be counted as one day of leave and the day of return shall be
        counted as one day of inpatient care.
     C. The facility shall hold the bed vacant during leave.
     D. The beneficiary's return from leave shall not be followed by discharge within 24 hours.
     E.   The facility shall identify the inclusive dates of leave in the manner designated by DAIL.
     F.   Leave shall be terminated on the day of death.




                                                                                                            46
Department of Vermont Health Access                                          Medicaid Covered Services Rules


                                      Authorization for Long-Term Care


7605        Authorization for Long-Term Care                             (02/06/10, 09-07)

  A. Nursing Facilities
       After DAIL has determined clinical eligibility for long-term care, the Department for
       Children and Families - Economic Services Division (ESD) determines financial eligibility
       for long-term care. ESD then furnishes written authorization to long-term care service
       providers of financial eligibility for long-term care. Eligibility for long-term care is based
       on financial eligibility, admission-discharge status, and clinical eligibility as determined
       by DAIL. Updated or revised authorizations are issued whenever one of these factors
       changes. The determination by DAIL shall control notwithstanding any statements by
       a physician or other health care professional to the contrary. Where applicable, such
       statements shall be reviewed by DAIL in making its determination.
       Authorization for payment will be made on behalf of an eligible beneficiary based on a
       determination of financial eligibility (Medicaid Rules 4100-4400), and clinical eligibility made by
       DAIL (Choices for Care 1115 Long-Term Care Medicaid Waiver Regulations, Section IV.B).
       No Medicaid payment will be made for services provided by any out-of-state nursing
       facilities, other than those mentioned below, unless the facility has been enrolled by
       the OVHA, and the admission authorized by DAIL.
       Some out-of-state nursing facilities are regarded the same as any participating Vermont facility.
       No prior authorization is needed. The current list of approved facilities can be found on
       the DAIL web site (http://www.dlp.vermont.gov/other/pre-approved-out-of-state-facilities)
       or can be requested from the DAIL.
       Information regarding nursing facility care in a hospital (swing beds) is
       located in Medicaid Rule 7606.
         (1) Level of Care
            DAIL has review authority for all nursing facilities. The determination by DAIL
            shall control notwithstanding any statement by a physician or other health care
            professional to the contrary. DAIL shall consider:
                 The need for a beneficiary’s admission to the facility.
                 The need for continued stay.
                 The level of care required.
                 The appropriateness and quality of care received.
       (2) Pre-Admission Screening and Resident Review (PASARR)
            Pre-admission Screening and Resident Review shall be completed for certain individuals
            who have been or will be admitted to a nursing facility, as required by federal regulations at
            42 CFR §483(c). PASARR shall determine if a person with a diagnosis of mental illness,
            mental retardation or a related condition requires the care provided in another type of facility,
            home and community-based care, or specialized services while residing in a nursing facility.
            The Department of Mental Health shall be responsible for PASARR for those individuals
            suspected of having a mental illness, or with a diagnosis of mental illness. DAIL shall be
            responsible for PASARR for those individuals suspected of having mental retardation or a
            related condition, or with a diagnosis of mental retardation or a related condition.
       (3) Post-Admission Review

                                                                                                           47
Department of Vermont Health Access                                        Medicaid Covered Services Rules


                                      Authorization for Long-Term Care


            Clinical eligibility for any Medicaid beneficiary or applicant residing in or
            admitted to a nursing facility shall be determined by DAIL within ten (10) days of
            notification of admission or notification of application. If the beneficiary is found
            medically ineligible, he/she will be notified by the DAIL.
       (4) Children in Long-Term Care Facilities
            Least restrictive alternate living situations shall be utilized for children under age
            18. When necessary, children may be served by nursing facilities in Vermont. All
            out-of-state nursing facilities are covered only after obtaining prior approval from DAIL.
            Payment for out-of-state nursing facilities for children will be covered only if there
            is no less restrictive placement in Vermont, only if deemed necessary by DAIL, and
            only if the facility is enrolled as a Vermont Medicaid provider.
  B. ICF/MRs
       Decisions regarding initial admission and continued stay in an ICF/MR shall be made
       DAIL in accordance with appropriate state and federal regulations.




                                                                                                         48
Department of Vermont Health Access                                         Medicaid Covered Services Rules


                             Nursing Facility Care in Hospitals - Swing Beds


7606 Nursing Facility Care in Hospitals - Swing Beds (02/06/10, 09-07)
Payment may be made on behalf of a Medicaid beneficiary who remains residing in a hospital upon
determination by the Department of Disabilities, Aging, and Independent Living (DAIL) that he/she no
longer needs hospital care but has been found in need of nursing facility level of care (swing bed). Such
payment will be made only if the following conditions are met:

  A.   The beneficiary is eligible for Medicaid during the period for which reimbursement is requested.
  B.   The beneficiary is determined by the appropriate Utilization Review authority to be in need of
       nursing facility care for this period.
  C.   The beneficiary has a qualifying inpatient hospital stay in the hospital seeking nursing facility
       payment under these provisions.
  D.   The hospital’s documentation shows a concerted and continuous effort to secure appropriate
       alternative placement for the beneficiary. No payment will be made in instances in which the
       Office of Vermont Health Access establishes that discharge planning efforts have been inadequate;
       where payment has already been made, recovery will be sought.
  E.   The beneficiary or anyone acting on his or her behalf has not declined an available bed in an
       appropriate participating long-term care facility in the area.

The per diem rate is all inclusive and includes the covered services as specified in Medicaid Rule 7603.
For beneficiaries covered by Medicare, billing for ancillary services covered by either Part A or Part B is
allowed. For beneficiaries not covered by Medicare, billing to Medicaid for ancillary services listed in
Medicaid Rule 7603.3 is allowed.

Out-of-state pre-approved hospitals with swing bed status are regarded the same as any participating
Vermont facility. The current list of approved facilities can be found on the DAIL web site
(http://www.dlp.vermont.gov/other/pre-approved-out-of-state-facilities) or can be requested from the
DAIL.




                                                                                                           49
Department of Vermont Health Access                                  Medicaid Covered Services Rules


                                      Pharmacy Administration


7700       Pharmacy Administration                 (11/01/2008, 08-03)




                                                                                                  50

