Source URL: https://legislature.vermont.gov/statutes/fullchapter/33/019
Retrieved: 2026-09-23

Vermont Laws 

 Skip to content 
 Skip to navigation 

 Skip to subnav 

 Searching 2025-2026 Session Return to current session 

 Vermont General Assembly 

 Home 

 Bills & Resolutions 

 Search

 Bill, Act & Resolution Search 

 Bills

 Released for Introduction 

 House Bills 

 Senate Bills 

 All Bills - Both Chambers 

 Bills Passed 

 Vetoed by the Governor 

 Enacted Without Signature 

 Bills In/Out of Committee 

 Resolutions

 House Resolutions 

 Senate Resolutions 

 All Resolutions - Both Chambers 

 Resolutions Adopted 

 Acts

 Acts & Resolves 

 Acts Affecting VSA Sections 

 Research

 Legislative Reports & Research 

 Committees 

 House Committees

 Agriculture, Food Resiliency, & Forestry 

 Appropriations 

 Commerce & Economic Development 

 Corrections & Institutions 

 Education 

 Energy & Digital Infrastructure 

 Environment 

 General & Housing 

 Government Operations & Military Affairs 

 Health Care 

 House Discrimination Prevention Panel 

 House Ethics Panel 

 House Sexual Harassment Prevention Panel 

 Human Services 

 Judiciary 

 Rules 

 Transportation 

 Ways & Means 

 Senate Committees

 Agriculture 

 Appropriations 

 Economic Development, Housing & General Affairs 

 Education 

 Ethics 

 Finance 

 Government Operations 

 Health & Welfare 

 Institutions 

 Judiciary 

 Natural Resources & Energy 

 Rules 

 Sexual Harassment Prevention Panel 

 Transportation 

 Committee Types

 All Committees 

 House Committees 

 Senate Committees 

 Joint Committees 

 Other Committees 

 Committees of Conference 

 All Committee Meetings

 All Scheduled Committee Meetings 

 All Scheduled Committees of Conference Meetings 
 -->
 Complete Weekly Schedule 

 Streaming Links

 Accessibility

 Research

 Legislative Reports & Research 

 Vermont Laws 

 Statutes

 Vermont Statutes Online 

 Statutes Search 

 Vermont Statutes at Lexis/Nexis 

 Constitution

 Constitution of the State of Vermont 

 Acts

 Acts & Resolves 

 Acts Affecting VSA Sections 

 Search

 Bill, Act & Resolution Search 

 Rules

 State Agency Rules at Lexis/Nexis 

 Court Rules at Lexis/Nexis 

 Legislative Committee on Administrative Rules (LCAR) 

 House 

 The House of Representatives

 House Overview 

 Find Representatives 

 All Representatives 

 House Committees 

 Officers

 Speaker of the House 

 Clerk of the House 

 Calendars & Journals

 Current House Calendar 

 All House Calendars 

 Current House Journal 

 All House Journals 

 House Bills for Introduction 

 Current Journal of the Joint Assembly 

 -->

 Journals of the Joint Assembly 

 Rules

 House Rules 

 Joint Rules 

 Search

 Search House Calendars & Journals 

 Related Information

 Streaming Links 

 Senate 

 The Senate

 Senate Overview 

 Find Senators 

 All Senators 

 Senate Committees 

 Officers

 President of the Senate (Lt. Governor) 

 President Pro Tempore 

 Secretary of the Senate 

 Calendars & Journals

 Current Senate Calendar 

 All Senate Calendars 

 Addendum 1 

 Current Senate Journal 

 All Senate Journals 

 Senate Bills for Introduction 

 Current Journal of the Joint Assembly 

 -->

 Journals of the Joint Assembly 

 Rules

 Senate Rules 

 Joint Rules 

 Search

 Search Senate Calendars & Journals 

 Related Information

 Streaming Links 

 Joint Fiscal Office 

 Reports & Research 

 Reports

 Reports & Research Overview 

 Find Legislative Reports 

 Reports Required by Acts & Resolves 

 Research

 Bills, Resolutions, Acts & Constitutional Proposals 

 Witness History 

 Subject History 

 Committees 

 Senate 

 House 

 Reapportionment 

 PRA Exemptions

 PRA Exemptions in Order 

 PRA Exemptions by Subject 

 PRA Exemptions Subject to 1 VSA 317(d)(2) 

 History

 History of the General Assembly 

 The State House 

 The State House

 Visiting the State House 

 About the State House 

 Hours & Directions 

 Accessibility 

 History

 History of the General Assembly 

 Civic Education

 Flowchart: How a Bill Becomes Law 

 Video: The Bill Process From Draft To Act 

 Become a Legislative Page! 

 School Field Trips 

 About Legislative Committees 

 Galleries

 Images of the State House 

 Events

 Farmers Night Concert Series 

 Staff & Offices 

 House

 Speaker of the House 

 Clerk of the House 

 Senate

 President of the Senate (Lt. Governor) 

 President Pro Tempore 

 Secretary of the Senate 

 Staff Offices

 Legislative Counsel 

 Legislative Information Technology 

 Joint Fiscal Office 

 Sergeant at Arms 

 Capitol Police Department 

 Office of Human Resources 

 Contact

 Questions & Comments 

 Career Opportunities

 Career Opportunities 

 Search for: 

 Bill or Resolution 

 Legislator 

 Committee 

 How to use this search 

 Search bills: 

 Search legislators: 

 Search committees: 

 Search 

 Searching 2025-2026 Session

 Print 

 The Vermont Statutes Online

 The Statutes below include the actions of the 2025 session of the General Assembly. 

NOTE : The Vermont Statutes Online is an unofficial copy of the Vermont Statutes Annotated that is provided as a convenience.

 Title 33 : Human Services 

 Chapter 019 : Medical Assistance 

 Subchapter 001 : MEDICAID 

 § 1900. Definitions 

 As used in this subchapter, unless otherwise indicated:

 (1) “Agency” means the Agency of Human Services.

 (2) “Commissioner” means the Commissioner of Vermont Health Access.

 (3) “Department” means the Department of Vermont Health Access.

 (4) “Insurer” means any insurance company, prepaid health care delivery plan, self-funded
 employee benefit plan, pension fund, hospital or medical service corporation, managed
 care organization, pharmacy benefit manager, prescription drug plan, retirement system,
 or similar entity that is under an obligation to make payments for medical services
 as a result of an injury, illness, or disease suffered by an individual.

 (5) “Legally liable representative” means a parent or person with an obligation of support
 to a recipient whether by contract, court order, or statute.

 (6) “Provider” means any person who has entered into an agreement with the State to provide
 any medical service.

 (7) “Recipient” means any person or group of persons who receive Medicaid.

 (8) “Secretary” means the Secretary of Human Services.

 (9) “Third party” means a person having an obligation to pay all or any portion of the
 medical expense incurred by a recipient at the time the medical service was provided.
 The obligation is not discharged by virtue of being undiscovered or undeveloped at
 the time a Medicaid claim is paid. Third parties include:

 (A) Medicare;

 (B) health insurance, including health and accident but not that portion specifically
 designated for “income protection” that has been considered in determining recipient
 eligibility to participate in the Medicaid program;

 (C) medical coverage provided in conjunction with other benefit or compensation programs,
 including military and veteran programs or workers’ compensation;

 (D) liability for medical expenses as agreed to or ordered in negligence suits, support
 settlements, or trust funds; and

 (E) managed care organizations, pharmacy benefit managers, self-insured plans, and other
 entities that are, by statute, contract, or agreement, legally responsible for the
 payment of a claim for a health care item or service.

 (10) “Tobacco” means all products listed in 7 V.S.A. § 1001(3).

 (11) “Tobacco manufacturer” means any person engaged in the process of designing, fabricating,
 assembling, producing, constructing, or otherwise preparing a product containing tobacco,
 including packaging or labeling of these products, with the intended purpose of selling
 the product for gain or profit. “Tobacco manufacturer” does not include persons whose
 activity is limited to growing natural leaf tobacco or to selling tobacco products
 at wholesale or retail to customers. “Tobacco manufacturer” also does not include
 any person who manufactures or produces firearms, dairy products, products containing
 alcohol, or other nontobacco products, unless such person also manufactures or produces
 tobacco products. (Added 2013, No. 131 (Adj. Sess.), § 38, eff. May 20, 2014.)

 § 1901. Administration of program 

 (a)(1) The Secretary of Human Services or designee shall take appropriate action, including
 making of rules, required to administer a medical assistance program under Title XIX
 (Medicaid) and Title XXI (SCHIP) of the Social Security Act.

 (2) The Secretary or designee shall seek approval from the General Assembly prior to applying
 for and implementing a waiver of Title XIX or Title XXI of the Social Security Act,
 an amendment to an existing waiver, or a new state option that would restrict eligibility
 or benefits pursuant to the Deficit Reduction Act of 2005. Approval by the General
 Assembly under this subdivision constitutes approval only for the changes that are
 scheduled for implementation.

 (3) [Repealed.]

 (4) A manufacturer of pharmaceuticals purchased by individuals receiving State pharmaceutical
 assistance in programs administered under this chapter shall pay to the Department
 of Vermont Health Access, as the Secretary’s designee, a rebate on all pharmaceutical
 claims for which State-only funds are expended in an amount that is in proportion
 to the State share of the total cost of the claim, as calculated annually on an aggregate
 basis, and based on the full Medicaid rebate amount as provided for in Section 1927(a)
 through (c) of the federal Social Security Act, 42 U.S.C. § 1396r-8.

 (b) [Repealed.]

 (c) The Secretary may charge a monthly premium, in amounts set by the General Assembly,
 per family for pregnant women and children eligible for medical assistance under Sections
 1902(a)(10)(A)(i)(III), (IV), (VI), and (VII) of Title XIX of the Social Security
 Act, whose family income exceeds 195 percent of the federal poverty level, as permitted
 under section 1902(r)(2) of that act. Fees collected under this subsection shall be
 credited to the State Health Care Resources Fund established in section 1901d of this title and shall be available to the Agency to offset the costs of providing Medicaid services.
 Any co-payments, coinsurance, or other cost sharing to be charged shall also be authorized
 and set by the General Assembly.

 (d)(1) To enable the State to manage public resources effectively while preserving and enhancing
 access to health care services in the State, the Department of Vermont Health Access
 is authorized to serve as a publicly operated managed care organization (MCO).

 (2) To the extent permitted under federal law, the Department of Vermont Health Access
 shall be exempt from any health maintenance organization (HMO) or MCO statutes in
 Vermont law and shall not be considered to be an HMO or MCO for purposes of State
 regulatory and reporting requirements. The MCO shall comply with the federal rules
 governing managed care organizations in 42 C.F.R. Part 438. The Vermont rules on the primary care case management in the Medicaid program shall
 be amended to apply to the MCO except to the extent that the rules conflict with the
 federal rules.

 (3) The Agency of Human Services and Department of Vermont Health Access shall report
 to the Health Reform Oversight Committee about implementation of Global Commitment
 in a manner and at a frequency to be determined by the Committee. Reporting shall,
 at a minimum, enable the tracking of expenditures by eligibility category, the type
 of care received, and to the extent possible allow historical comparison with expenditures
 under the previous Medicaid appropriation model (by department and program) and, if
 appropriate, with the amounts transferred by another department to the Department
 of Vermont Health Access. Reporting shall include spending in comparison to any applicable
 budget neutrality standards.

 (e) [Repealed.]

 (f) The Secretary shall not impose a prescription co-payment for individuals under age
 21 enrolled in Medicaid or Dr. Dynasaur.

 (g) The Department of Vermont Health Access shall post prominently on its website the
 total per-member per-month cost for each of its Medicaid and Medicaid waiver programs
 and the amount of the State’s share and the beneficiary’s share of such cost.

 (h) To the extent required to avoid federal antitrust violations, the Department of Vermont
 Health Access shall facilitate and supervise the participation of health care professionals
 and health care facilities in the planning and implementation of payment reform in
 the Medicaid and SCHIP programs. The Department shall ensure that the process and
 implementation include sufficient State supervision over these entities to comply
 with federal antitrust provisions and shall refer to the Attorney General for appropriate
 action the activities of any individual or entity that the Department determines,
 after notice and an opportunity to be heard, violate State or federal antitrust laws
 without a countervailing benefit of improving patient care, improving access to health
 care, increasing efficiency, or reducing costs by modifying payment methods. (Added 1967, No. 147, § 6; amended 1997, No. 155 (Adj. Sess.), § 21; 2005, No. 159 (Adj. Sess.), § 2; 2005, No. 215 (Adj. Sess.), § 308, eff. May 31, 2006; 2007, No. 74, § 3, eff. June 6, 2007; 2009, No. 156 (Adj. Sess.), § E.309.15, eff. June 3, 2010; 2009, No. 156 (Adj. Sess.), § I.43; 2011, No. 48, § 16a, eff. Jan. 1, 2012; 2011, No. 139 (Adj. Sess.), § 51, eff. May 14, 2012; 2011, No. 162 (Adj. Sess.), § E.307.6; 2011, No. 171 (Adj. Sess.), § 41c; 2013, No. 79, § 23, eff. Jan. 1, 2014; 2013, No. 79, § 46; 2013, No. 131 (Adj. Sess.), § 39, eff. May 20, 2014; 2013, No. 142 (Adj. Sess.), § 98; 2017, No. 210 (Adj. Sess.), § 3, eff. June 1, 2018; 2023, No. 85 (Adj. Sess.), § 471, eff. July 1, 2024.)

 § 1901a. Medicaid budget 

 (a) The General Assembly shall approve each year a Medicaid budget. The annual Medicaid
 budget shall include an annual financial plan, and a five-year financial plan accounting
 for expenditures and revenues relating to Medicaid and any other health care assistance
 program administered by the Agency of Human Services.

 (b) The Secretary of Human Services or his or her designee and the Commissioner of Finance
 and Management shall provide quarterly to the Joint Fiscal Committee such information
 and analysis as the Committee reasonably determines is necessary to assist the General
 Assembly in the preparation of the Medicaid budget. (Added 2001, No. 142 (Adj. Sess.), § 148a; amended 2005, No. 215 (Adj. Sess.), § 309, eff. May 31, 2006; 2019, No. 144 (Adj. Sess.), § 31.)

 § 1901b. Pharmacy program enrollment 

 (a) The Department of Vermont Health Access and the Department for Children and Families
 shall monitor actual caseloads, revenue, and expenditures; anticipated caseloads,
 revenue, and expenditures; and actual and anticipated savings from implementation
 of the preferred drug list, supplemental rebates, and other cost containment activities
 in each State pharmaceutical assistance program, including VPharm. When applicable,
 the Departments shall allocate supplemental rebate savings to each program proportionate
 to expenditures in each program.

 (b) As used in this section, “State pharmaceutical assistance program” means any health
 assistance programs administered by the Agency of Human Services providing prescription
 drug coverage, including the Medicaid program, VPharm, the State Children’s Health
 Insurance Program, the State of Vermont AIDS Medication Assistance Program, the General
 Assistance Program, the Pharmacy Discount Plan Program, and any other health assistance
 programs administered by the Agency providing prescription drug coverage. (Added 2001, No. 142 (Adj. Sess.), § 148b; amended 2005, No. 174 (Adj. Sess.), § 94; 2005, No. 215 (Adj. Sess.), §§ 316, 317; 2009, No. 156 (Adj. Sess.), § I.44; 2011, No. 171 (Adj. Sess.), § 41c; 2013, No. 79, § 47, eff. Jan. 1, 2014.)

 § 1901c. Repealed. 2011, No. 48, § 32. 

 § 1901d. State Health Care Resources Fund 

 (a) The State Health Care Resources Fund is established in the State Treasury as a special
 fund to be a source of financing for health care coverage for beneficiaries of the
 State health care assistance programs under the Global Commitment to Health waiver
 approved by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services under Section 1115 of the
 Social Security Act.

 (b) Into the Fund shall be deposited:

 (1)-(4) [Repealed.]

 (5) premium amounts paid by individuals unless paid directly to the insurer; and

 (6) the proceeds from grants, donations, contributions, taxes, recoveries, and any other
 sources of revenue as may be provided by statute, rule, agreement, or act of the General
 Assembly.

 (7) [Repealed.]

 (c) The Fund shall be administered pursuant to 32 V.S.A. chapter 7, subchapter 5, except that interest earned on the Fund and any remaining balance
 shall be retained in the Fund. The Agency shall maintain records indicating the amount
 of money in the Fund at any time.

 (d) All monies received by or generated to the Fund shall be used only as allowed by appropriation
 of the General Assembly for the administration and delivery of health care covered
 through State health care assistance programs administered by the Agency under the
 Global Commitment to Health Medicaid Section 1115 waiver, immunizations under 18 V.S.A. § 1130, and the development and implementation of the Blueprint for Health under 18 V.S.A. § 702. (Added 2005, No. 93 (Adj. Sess.), § 16a, eff. July 1, 2006; amended 2005, No. 191 (Adj. Sess.), § 41; 2007, No. 65, § 387, eff. June 4, 2007; 2011, No. 45, § 36o; 2011, No. 75 (Adj. Sess.), § 110; 2013, No. 50, § E.307.4; 2019, No. 6, § 65, eff. April 22, 2019; 2021, No. 20, § 298.)

 § 1901e. Global Commitment Fund 

 (a) The Global Commitment Fund is created in the Treasury as a special fund. The Fund
 shall consist of the revenues received by the Treasurer as payment of the actuarially
 certified premium from the Agency of Human Services to the managed care organization
 within the Department of Vermont Health Access for the purpose of providing services
 under the Global Commitment to Health waiver approved by the Centers for Medicare
 and Medicaid Services under Section 1115 of the Social Security Act.

 (b) The monies in the Fund shall be disbursed as allowed by appropriation of the General
 Assembly, and shall be disbursed by the Treasurer on warrants issued by the Commissioner
 of Finance and Management, when authorized by the Commissioner of Vermont Health Access
 and approved by the Commissioner of Finance and Management consistent with the interdepartmental
 agreements between the managed care organization within the Department of Vermont
 Health Access and departments delivering eligible services under the waiver. The Department
 of Vermont Health Access shall not modify an appropriation through an interdepartmental
 agreement or any other mechanism. A department or agency authorized to spend monies
 from this Fund under an interdepartmental agreement may spend monies appropriated
 as a base Medicaid expense for an allowable managed care organization investment under
 the terms and conditions of the Global Commitment to Health Medicaid Section 1115
 waiver only after receiving approval from the Agency of Human Services.

 (c) Annually, on or before October 1, the Agency shall provide a detailed report to the
 Joint Fiscal Committee that describes the managed care organization’s investments
 under the terms and conditions of the Global Commitment to Health Medicaid Section
 1115 waiver, including the amount of the investment and the agency or departments
 authorized to make the investment. (Added 2005, No. 93 (Adj. Sess.), § 16c, eff. Oct. 1, 2005; amended 2005, No. 215 (Adj. Sess.), § 307, eff. May 31, 2006; 2009, No. 156 (Adj. Sess.), § I.46; 2013, No. 131 (Adj. Sess.), § 40, eff. May 20, 2014; 2015, No. 172 (Adj. Sess.), § E.306.5; 2021, No. 20, § 299.)

 § 1901f. Medicaid program enrollment and expenditure reports 

 By March 1, June 1, September 1, and December 1 of each year, the Commissioner of
 Vermont Health Access or designee shall submit to the General Assembly a quarterly
 report on enrollment and total expenditures by Medicaid eligibility group for all
 programs paid for by the Department of Vermont Health Access during the preceding
 calendar quarter and for the fiscal year to date. Total expenditures for Medicaid-related
 programs paid for by other departments within the Agency of Human Services shall be
 included in this report by Medicaid eligibility group to the extent such information
 is available. (Added 2011, No. 75 (Adj. Sess.), § 111, eff. March 7, 2012; amended 2015, No. 58, § E.307.2.)

 § 1901g. Medicaid coverage for home telemonitoring services 

 (a) The Agency of Human Services shall provide Medicaid coverage for home telemonitoring
 services performed by home health agencies or other qualified providers as defined
 by the Agency of Human Services for Medicaid beneficiaries who have serious or chronic
 medical conditions that can result in frequent or recurrent hospitalizations and emergency
 room admissions. Beginning on July 1, 2014, the Agency shall provide coverage for
 home telemonitoring for one or more conditions or risk factors for which it determines,
 using reliable data, that home telemonitoring services are appropriate and that coverage
 will be budget-neutral. The Agency may expand coverage to include additional conditions
 or risk factors identified using evidence-based best practices if the expanded coverage
 will remain budget-neutral or as funds become available.

 (b) A home health agency or other qualified provider shall ensure that clinical information
 gathered by the home health agency or other qualified provider while providing home
 telemonitoring services is shared with the patient’s treating health care professionals.
 The Agency of Human Services may impose other reasonable requirements on the use of
 home telemonitoring services.

 (c) As used in this section:

 (1) “Home health agency” means an entity that has received a certificate of need from
 the State to provide home health services and is certified to provide services pursuant
 to 42 U.S.C. § 1395x(o).

 (2) “Home telemonitoring service” means a health service that requires scheduled remote
 monitoring of data related to a patient’s health, in conjunction with a home health
 plan of care, and access to the data by a home health agency or other qualified provider
 as defined by the Agency of Human Services. (Added 2013, No. 153 (Adj. Sess.), § 1.)

 § 1901h. Repealed. 2017, No. 3, § 75a, eff. March 2, 2017. 

 § 1901i. Repealed. 2017, No. 64, § 3, effective October 1, 2017. 

 § 1901j. Medicaid reimbursement for long-acting reversible contraceptives 

 (a) As used in this section, “health care provider” has the same meaning as in 18 V.S.A. § 9402.

 (b) The Department of Vermont Health Access shall reimburse health care providers for
 the full cost of a device providing long-acting reversible contraception when the
 device is inserted during a Medicaid beneficiary’s postpartum hospital stay. (Added 2017, No. 138 (Adj. Sess.), § 1.)

 § 1901k. Medicaid coverage for hearing aids and audiology services 

 Vermont Medicaid shall provide coverage for medically necessary hearing aids and audiology
 services when delivered by a health care professional practicing within the scope
 of the professional’s license, including audiologic examinations, hearing screenings,
 fitting of hearing aids, prescriptions for hearing aid batteries, and other services
 as defined by the Agency of Human Services by rule. (Added 2021, No. 108 (Adj. Sess.), § 3, eff. May 11, 2022.)

 § 1901l. Medication for opioid use disorder 

 (a) The Agency of Human Services shall provide coverage to Medicaid beneficiaries for
 medically necessary medication for opioid use disorder when prescribed by a health
 care professional practicing within the scope of the professional’s license and participating
 in the Medicaid program.

 (b) Pending approval of the Drug Utilization Review Board, the Agency shall cover at least
 one medication in each therapeutic class for methadone, buprenorphine, and naltrexone
 as listed on Medicaid’s preferred drug list without requiring prior authorization. (Added 2023, No. 22, § 7, eff. September 1, 2023.)

 § 1901m. Reimbursement for emergency medical services 

 (a) To the extent permitted under federal law or waivers of federal law, the Agency of
 Human Services shall reimburse a provider of emergency medical services for delivering
 emergency medical services to a Medicaid beneficiary who was not transported to a
 different location during the period of the emergency. The reimbursement shall be
 in an amount equal to the Medicare basic life support rate.

 (b) Annually as part of its budget presentation, the Agency of Human Services shall report
 the amount of additional funds that would be necessary to reimburse emergency medical
 service providers at a level equal to the applicable Medicare rate for all emergency
 medical services delivered to Medicaid beneficiaries. (Added 2023, No. 157 (Adj. Sess.), § 3, eff. June 6, 2024.)

 § 1901n. High-intensity residential treatment for substance use disorder and co-occurring mental
 conditions 

 (a) The Agency of Human Services shall provide coverage for medically necessary high-intensity,
 medically monitored residential treatment episodes to Medicaid beneficiaries with
 substance use disorder and a co-occurring mental health condition when medically necessary
 high-intensity, medically monitored residential treatment episodes are prescribed
 by a health care professional employed by a residential treatment program who is practicing
 within the scope of the health professional’s license and the residential treatment
 program is participating in Vermont’s Medicaid program.

 (b) Coverage provided under this section shall be for the entire length of stay prescribed
 by a health care professional employed by a residential treatment program, who shall
 take into account current best practices for each level of care within the substance
 use continuum of care. (Added 2025, No. 22, § 1, eff. July 1, 2025.)

 § 1901o. Low-intensity residential treatment for substance use disorder and co-occurring mental
 conditions 

 (a) The Agency of Human Services shall provide coverage for medically necessary low-intensity,
 clinically managed residential treatment episodes to Medicaid beneficiaries with substance
 use disorder and a co-occurring mental health condition when medically necessary low-intensity,
 clinically managed residential treatment episodes are prescribed by a health care
 professional employed by a residential treatment program who is practicing within
 the scope of the health care professional’s license and the residential treatment
 program is participating in Vermont’s Medicaid program.

 (b) Coverage provided under this section shall be for the entire length of stay prescribed
 by a health care professional employed by a residential treatment program, who shall
 take into account current best practices for levels of care within the substance use
 continuum of care. (Added 2025, No. 22, § 2, eff. July 1, 2025.)

 § 1901p. Medicaid coverage for doula services [Effective on later of July 1, 2026 or approval
 of state plan amendment] 

 (a) As used in this section, “certified community-based perinatal doula” means a community-based
 perinatal doula who holds a certificate issued pursuant to 26 V.S.A. chapter 84.

 (b)(1) The Department of Vermont Health Access shall provide reimbursement to a certified
 community-based perinatal doula for providing direct emotional and physical support
 and educational and informational services to birthing individuals covered by Medicaid
 during pregnancy, labor and delivery, and the postpartum period, regardless of the
 outcome of the pregnancy.

 (2) A certified community-based perinatal doula shall not receive reimbursement for travel
 time or mileage expenses. (Added 2025, No. 50, § 5.)

 § 1902. Qualification for medical assistance 

 (a) In determining whether a person is medically indigent, the Secretary of Human Services
 shall prescribe and use an income standard and requirements for eligibility that will
 permit the receipt of federal matching funds under Title XIX of the Social Security
 Act.

 (b) Workers with disabilities whose income is less than 250 percent of the federal poverty
 level shall be eligible for Medicaid. The income also must not exceed the Medicaid
 protected income level for one or the Supplemental Security Income (SSI) payment level
 for two, whichever is higher, after disregarding the earnings of the working individual
 with disabilities; Social Security disability insurance benefits, including Social
 Security retirement benefits converted automatically from Social Security Disability
 Insurance (SSDI), if applicable; any veteran’s disability benefits; and, if the working
 individual with disabilities is married, all income of the spouse. The Agency of Human
 Services shall adopt rules governing documentation of earnings of working individuals
 with disabilities. The resource limit for this program shall be $10,000.00 for an
 individual and $15,000.00 for a couple at the time of enrollment in the program. Assets
 attributable to earnings made after enrollment in the program shall be disregarded. (Added 1967, No. 147, § 6; amended 1987, No. 89, § 314b; 2005, No. 56, § 4, eff. June 13, 2005; 2015, No. 157 (Adj. Sess.), § G.1, eff. June 2, 2016; 2017, No. 210 (Adj. Sess.), § 1, eff. June 1, 2018; 2025, No. 27, § E.307, eff. July 1, 2025.)

 § 1902a. Confidentiality of Medicaid applications and records; disclosure to authorized representative 

 (a) All applications submitted and records created under the authority of this chapter
 concerning any applicant for or recipient of Medicaid are confidential and shall be
 made available only to persons authorized by the Agency, the State, or the United
 States for purposes directly related to plan administration. In addition, the Agency
 shall maintain a process to allow a Medicaid applicant or recipient or his or her
 authorized representative to have access to confidential information when necessary
 for an eligibility determination and the appeals process.

 (b) Applications and records considered confidential are those that disclose one or more
 of the following:

 (1) the name and address of the applicant or recipient;

 (2) medical services provided;

 (3) the applicant’s or recipient’s social and economic circumstances;

 (4) the Agency’s evaluation of personal information;

 (5) medical data, including diagnosis and past history of disease or disability; or

 (6) any information received for the purpose of verifying income eligibility and determining
 the amount of medical assistance payments.

 (c) A person found to have violated this section may be assessed an administrative penalty
 of not more than $1,000.00 for a first violation and not more than $2,000.00 for any
 subsequent violation.

 (d) As used in this section:

 (1) “Authorized representative” means any person designated by a Medicaid applicant or
 recipient to review confidential information about the Medicaid applicant or recipient
 pertaining to the eligibility determination and the appeals process.

 (2) “Purposes directly related to plan administration” include establishing eligibility,
 determining the amount of medical assistance, providing services to recipients, conducting
 or assisting with an investigation or prosecution, and civil or criminal proceedings,
 or audits, related to the administration of the State Medicaid program. (Added 2015, No. 172 (Adj. Sess.), § E.306.9; amended 2019, No. 15, § 2, eff. May 6, 2019.)

 § 1903. Contract authorized 

 (a) The Commissioner of Vermont Health Access may contract with a private organization
 to operate, under his or her control and supervision, parts of the medical assistance
 program.

 (b) The contract shall provide that either party may cancel it upon reasonable notice
 to the other party.

 (c) In furtherance of the purposes of the contract, the Commissioner of Vermont Health
 Access may requisition funds for the purposes of this subchapter, with the approval
 of the Governor, and the Commissioner of Finance and Management shall issue a warrant
 in favor of the contracting party to permit the contracting party to make payments
 to vendors under the contract. The Commissioner of Vermont Health Access shall quarterly,
 and at other times as the Commissioner of Finance and Management requires, render
 an account in a form as the Commissioner of Finance and Management prescribes of the
 expenditures of monies so advanced. (Added 1967, No. 147, § 6; amended 1983, No. 195 (Adj. Sess.), § 5; 2005, No. 174 (Adj. Sess.), § 96; 2009, No. 156 (Adj. Sess.), § I.47.)

 § 1903a. Care management program 

 (a) The Commissioner of Vermont Health Access shall coordinate with the Director of the
 Blueprint for Health to provide chronic care management through the Blueprint and,
 as appropriate, create an additional level of care coordination for individuals with
 one or more chronic conditions who are enrolled in Medicaid or Dr. Dynasaur. The program
 shall not include individuals who are in an institute for mental disease as defined
 in 42 C.F.R. § 435.1009.

 (b) The Commissioner shall include individuals with a broad range of chronic conditions
 in the Blueprint for Health and the care management program. (Added 2005, No. 191 (Adj. Sess.), § 6; amended 2007, No. 70, §§ 22, 23; 2009, No. 146 (Adj. Sess.), § C33; 2013, No. 79, § 24, eff. Jan. 1, 2014.)

 § 1904. Repealed. 2013, No. 131 (Adj. Sess.), § 41, eff. May 20, 2014. 

 § 1905. Disproportionate share program 

 The Secretary of Human Services shall adopt a disproportionate share program for hospitals
 consistent with the requirements of Title XIX of the Social Security Act. (Added 1991, No. 253 (Adj. Sess.), § 10.)

 § 1905a. Medicaid reimbursements to certain outpatient providers 

 (a) To the extent permitted under federal law, the Department of Vermont Health Access
 shall not use provider-based billing for outpatient medical services provided at an
 off-campus outpatient department of a hospital as a result of the provider’s transfer
 to or acquisition by the hospital.

 (b) As used in this section, “off-campus” means a facility located more than 250 yards
 from the main hospital campus. (Added 2015, No. 143 (Adj. Sess.), § 3.)

 § 1906. Recoupment of amounts spent on child medical care 

 (a) The State Medicaid agency, any State agency administering health benefits or a health
 benefit plan for which Medicaid is a source of funding, or the Office of Child Support
 may recoup the amounts paid by the State for child medical expenses from any person
 who is required by court or administrative order to provide coverage of the cost of
 health services to a child eligible for medical assistance under Medicaid; and who
 either:

 (1) Has received payment from a third party for the costs of such services, but has not
 used the payments to reimburse either the other parent or guardian of the child or
 the provider of the services. Claims for current and past due child support shall
 take priority over these claims.

 (2) Has failed to give any notice required by 15 V.S.A. § 663(d).

 (b) In addition to any other remedies available at law, all remedies available for the
 collection and enforcement of child support under 15 V.S.A. chapter 11 shall apply to medical support recoupment under this section. (Added 1993, No. 231 (Adj. Sess.), § 4; amended 2015, No. 23, § 56.)

 § 1906a. Recovery against estate; homestead exemptions 

 No recovery of medical expenses shall be made under this subchapter against a homestead,
 provided that the homestead would pass to one or more lineal heirs or siblings of
 the decedent who either have income below 300 percent of the federal poverty level
 or who have contributed significantly, monetarily or otherwise, to the decedent so
 as to allow the decedent to delay or avoid nursing home placement. If a maximum homestead
 value exemption is allowed by federal law, then any recoveries due to the U.S. Department
 of Health and Human Services on homesteads valued between such maximum and $125,000.00
 shall be paid through State general funds provided the caregiving or poverty standards
 set forth in this section are also met and the probate estate was opened after June
 30, 2000. (Added 1999, No. 62, § 125; amended 1999, No. 152 (Adj. Sess.), § 117a, eff. May 29, 2000; 2013, No. 131 (Adj. Sess.), § 42, eff. May 20, 2014.)

 § 1907. Subrogation 

 To the extent that payment for covered expenses has been made under the Medicaid program
 or through any State agency administering health benefits or a health benefit plan
 for which Medicaid is a source of funding for health care items or services furnished
 to an individual, in any case where a third party has a legal liability to make payments,
 the State is considered to have acquired the rights of the individual to payment by
 any other party for those health care items or services. An insurer shall accept the
 Agency’s right to recovery and the assignment to the Agency of any right of a person
 to payment from the third party for medical services for which the Agency has made
 payment under this chapter. (Added 1993, No. 231 (Adj. Sess.), § 5; amended 2007, No. 65, § 110b; 2013, No. 131 (Adj. Sess.), § 43, eff. May 20, 2014.)

 § 1908. Medicaid; payer of last resort; release of information 

 (a) Any clause in an insurance contract, plan, or agreement that limits or excludes payments
 to a recipient is void.

 (b) Medicaid shall be the payer of last resort to any insurer that contracts to pay health
 care costs for a recipient.

 (c) Every applicant for or recipient of Medicaid under this subchapter is deemed to have
 authorized all third parties to release to the Agency all information needed by the
 Agency to secure or enforce its rights under this subchapter. The Agency shall inform
 an applicant or recipient of the provisions of this subsection at the time of application
 for Medicaid benefits.

 (d) On and after July 1, 2016, an insurer shall: 

 (1) Accept the Agency’s right of recovery and the assignment of rights and shall not charge
 the Agency or any of its authorized agents fees for the processing of claims or eligibility
 requests. Data files requested by or provided to the Agency shall provide the Agency
 with eligibility and coverage information that will enable the Agency to determine
 the existence of third-party coverage for Medicaid recipients, the period during which
 Medicaid recipients may have been covered by the insurer, and the nature of the coverage
 provided, including information such as the name, address, and identifying number
 of the plan.

 (2) If the insurer requires prior authorization for an item or service, accept the Agency’s
 authorization that the item or service is covered under the Medicaid state plan or
 waiver as if such authorization were the insurer’s prior authorization.

 (e)(1) Upon request, to the extent permitted under the federal Health Insurance Portability
 and Accountability Act and other federal privacy laws and notwithstanding any State
 privacy law to the contrary, an insurer shall transmit to the Agency, in a manner
 prescribed by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services or as agreed between
 the insurer and the Agency, an electronic file of all of the insurer’s identified
 subscribers or policyholders and their dependents.

 (2) An insurer shall comply with a request under the provisions of this subsection not
 later than 60 days following the date of the Agency’s request and shall be required
 to provide the Agency with only the information required by this section.

 (3) The Agency shall request the data from an insurer once each month. The Agency shall
 not request subscriber or policyholder enrollment data that precede the date of the
 request by more than three years.

 (4) The Agency shall use the data collected pursuant to this section solely for the purposes
 of determining whether a Medicaid recipient also has or has had coverage with the
 insurer providing the data.

 (5) The Agency shall ensure that all data collected and maintained pursuant to this section
 are collected and stored securely and that such data are stored no longer than necessary
 to determine whether Medicaid benefits may be coordinated with the insurer, or as
 otherwise required by law. Insurers shall not be liable for any security incidents
 caused by the Agency in the collection or maintenance of the data.

 (f)(1) Each insurer shall submit a file containing information required to coordinate benefits,
 such as the name, address, group policy number, coverage type, Social Security number,
 and date of birth of each subscriber or policyholder and each dependent covered by
 the insurer, including the policy effective and termination dates, claims submission
 address, and employer’s mailing address.

 (2) The Agency shall adopt rules governing the exchange of information pursuant to this
 section. The rules shall be consistent with laws relating to the confidentiality or
 privacy of personal information and medical records, including the Health Insurance
 Portability and Accountability Act.

 (g) From funds recovered pursuant to this subchapter, the federal government shall be
 paid a portion equal to the proportionate share originally provided by the federal
 government to pay for medical assistance to a recipient or minor. (Added 1995, No. 152 (Adj. Sess.), § 2; amended 2007, No. 65, § 110c; 2015, No. 172 (Adj. Sess.), § E.306.7; 2021, No. 20, § 300; 2023, No. 51, § 2, eff. July 1, 2023.)

 § 1908a. Vermont Partnership for Long-Term Care 

 (a) The Secretary of Human Services or his or her designee, in consultation with the Commissioner
 of Financial Regulation, shall establish by rule the Vermont Partnership for Long-Term
 Care Program.

 (b) The Program shall provide Medicaid extended coverage to an individual receiving long-term
 care services if there is federal participation for such coverage, and if the individual:

 (1) is or was covered by a long-term care insurance policy under 8 V.S.A. chapter 154 that provides coverage for three years of long-term care services in an amount that,
 in combination with other resources available to the individual, is sufficient to
 permit the individual to pay for the individual’s own care while the policy remains
 in force and that is precertified by the Department of Financial Regulation pursuant
 to subsection (c) of this section;

 (2) meets any other requirements for approval of participation under the Program; and

 (3) has exhausted coverage and benefits under the long-term care insurance policy as required
 by the Program.

 (c)(1) The Department of Financial Regulation shall adopt rules for precertification of long-term
 care partnership policies and for the information needed to evaluate the Program.
 The Department of Financial Regulation shall consider whether all precertified policies
 should require:

 (A) protection against loss of benefits due to inflation;

 (B) coverage of individual assessment and case management;

 (C) a minimum level of covered benefits, including coverage of long-term care services
 as defined in subsection (g) of this section;

 (D) the option of a nonforfeiture benefit;

 (E) a level premium;

 (F) information to the purchaser about available consumer information and public education
 provided by the Department of Financial Regulation and the Department of Vermont Health
 Access; and

 (G) Program information, using the uniform data set developed by other states with long-term
 care partnership programs, and reports necessary to document the extent of the Medicaid
 resource protection offered and to evaluate the partnership for long-term care.

 (2) The Department of Financial Regulation shall not require all long-term care partnership
 insurance policies to be federally tax-qualified long-term care insurance policies.

 (d) The Secretary or his or her designee may enter into reciprocal agreements with other
 states to extend the benefits of the Vermont Partnership for Long-Term Care Program
 to Vermont residents who had purchased qualified long-term care policies in other
 states.

 (e) The Agency and the Department of Financial Regulation shall make available consumer
 information regarding the Long-Term Care Partnership Program. The Secretary and Commissioner
 may allocate responsibilities for providing consumer information between the Agency
 and Department.

 (f) As used in this section:

 (1) “Long-term care services” includes care, treatment, maintenance, and services:

 (A) provided in a nursing facility;

 (B) provided in a residential care home or assisted living residence;

 (C) provided by a home care services agency, certified home health agency, or long-term
 home health care program;

 (D) provided by an adult day care program;

 (E) provided by a personal care provider licensed or regulated by any other State or local
 agency; and

 (F) such other long-term care services as determined by the Secretary or his or her designee
 for which medical assistance is otherwise available under the Medicaid program.

 (2) “Medicaid extended coverage” means eligibility for medical assistance without regard
 to the resource requirements of the Medicaid program and without regard to the recovery
 of medical assistance from the estates of individuals and the imposition of liens
 pursuant to the requirements of the Medicaid program; provided, however, that nothing
 in this section shall prevent the imposition of a lien or recovery against property
 of an individual on account of medical assistance incorrectly paid. Nothing in this
 section shall modify what medical assistance is covered by Medicaid. (Added 2003, No. 124 (Adj. Sess.), § 4; amended 2005, No. 174 (Adj. Sess.), § 98; 2009, No. 156 (Adj. Sess.), § I.50.)

 § 1909. Direct payments to Agency; discharge of insurer’s obligation 

 (a) When a recipient who is covered by the recipient’s or a legally liable representative’s
 insurer receives medical benefits under this subchapter, payment for covered services
 or notice of denial shall be issued directly to the provider.

 (b) A provider shall indicate on any claim form submitted to an insurer for covered services
 whether or not the person receiving treatment is a recipient.

 (c)(1) An insurer that receives notice that the Agency has made payments to the provider
 shall pay benefits or send notice of denial directly to the Agency. Receipt of an
 Agency claim form by an insurer constitutes notice that payment of the claim was made
 by the Agency to the provider and that form supersedes any contract requirements of
 the insurer relating to the form of submission.

 (2) An insurer shall respond to any request made by the Agency regarding a claim for payment
 for any health care item or service that is submitted not later than three years after
 the date of the provision of such health care item or service.

 (3) An insurer shall not: 

 (A) deny a claim submitted by the Agency solely on the basis of the date of submission
 of the claim, the type or format of the claim form, or a failure to present proper
 documentation at the point-of-sale that is the basis of the claim, if the claim is
 submitted by the Agency within the three-year period beginning on the date on which
 the item or service was furnished and any action by the Agency to enforce its rights
 with respect to a claim is commenced within six years following the Agency’s submission
 of the claim; or

 (B) deny a claim submitted by the Agency on the basis of failing to obtain a prior authorization
 for the item or service for which the claim is being submitted, if the Agency has
 transmitted authorization that the item or service is covered by the Medicaid state
 plan or waiver under subdivision 1908(d)(2) of this title.

 (d) An insurer that has been notified of a claim by the Agency under this section and
 proceeds to pay the claim to a person other than the Agency is not discharged from
 payment of the Agency’s claim.

 (e) Payment to the Agency by an insurer under this section discharges the insurer’s obligation
 for further payment on the claim to the extent of the amount paid. (Added 1995, No. 152 (Adj. Sess.), § 3; amended 2007, No. 65, § 110d; 2023, No. 51, § 2, eff. July 1, 2023.)

 § 1910. Liability of third parties; liens 

 (a) The Agency shall have a lien against a third party, to the extent of the amount paid
 by the Agency for medical expenses, on any recovery for that claim, whether by judgment,
 compromise, mediation, or settlement, whenever:

 (1) the Agency pays medical expenses for or on behalf of a recipient who has been injured
 or has an illness or disease as a result of negligence; and

 (2) the recipient asserts a claim against a third party for damages resulting from the
 injury, illness, or disease.

 (b)(1) The Agency shall have a lien against the insurer, to the extent of the amount paid
 by the Agency for past medical expenses, on any recovery from the insurer, whenever
 the Agency pays medical expenses or renders medical services on behalf of a recipient
 who has been injured or has an injury, illness, or disease and the recipient asserts
 a claim against an insurer as a result of the injury, illness, or disease.

 (2) Effective July 1, 2013, the recipient’s insurer or alleged liable party’s insurer,
 if any, shall take reasonable steps to discover the existence of the Agency’s medical
 assistance. Payment to the recipient instead of the Agency does not discharge the
 insurer from payment of the Agency’s claim.

 (c) A recipient who has applied for or has received medical assistance under this subchapter
 and the recipient’s attorney, if any, shall cooperate with the Agency by informing
 the Agency in writing within a reasonable period of time after learning that the Agency
 has paid medical expenses for the recipient. The recipient’s attorney shall take reasonable
 steps to discover the existence of the Agency’s medical assistance.

 (d) Any written notice provided to the Agency pursuant to subsection (c) of this section
 shall disclose the identity and address of any third party and his, her, or its insurer
 against whom the recipient has a right of recovery, and the name of the court in which
 the legal recovery action, if any, was brought.

 (e)(1) A recipient or an attorney on behalf of a recipient shall allocate the full amount
 paid by the Agency for past medical expenses to or for any recovery obtained by whatever
 means.

 (2) A recipient or an attorney on behalf of a recipient shall pay to the Agency, within
 30 days after receipt of settlement proceeds or recovery of a judgment, the full amount
 of the medical expenses owed to the Agency. If full payment of the required sum is
 not made to the Agency within the 30-day period, the recipient or his or her attorney
 shall place a sum equal to the full amount of the medical expenses paid in an escrow
 account pending an agreement, mediation, or judicial determination of the Agency’s
 right to the amount.

 (3) The Agency’s lien for its medical expenditures relating to the recipient’s injury,
 illness, or disease shall be given priority over all other claims on the total amount
 recovered.

 (4) In making the determination whether to pursue, reduce, or compromise a claim, the
 Agency may in its discretion consider the factual, evidentiary, and legal issues of
 liability between the recipient and any liable third party and the total amount available
 to satisfy the recipient’s claim. Where the amount of reimbursement the Agency can
 reasonably expect to recover exceeds the costs of such recovery, the Agency shall
 not be required to seek reimbursement from or may reduce or compromise a claim against
 any liable third party, the insurer, or both. Whether or not the Agency exercises
 its discretion shall not be subject to any claim of abuse of discretion.

 (f) A lien created under this section shall not be effective unless:

 (1) notice of the lien is filed in the office of the clerk of the town in which the Agency
 is located and contains the name and address of the recipient, acknowledgment of the
 recipient’s application for or receipt of medical assistance, and the name of the
 person alleged to be liable; and

 (2) the Agency mails a notice of the lien with a statement of the date it was filed to
 the person alleged to be liable.

 (g) The Agency shall send a copy of the notice of the lien required by subsection (f)
 of this section to the following persons, if the appropriate names and addresses can
 be determined:

 (1) the recipient for whom the Department has paid medical expenses;

 (2) any insurance carrier that may be ultimately liable; and

 (3) any attorney for the recipient.

 (h) Within 45 days after the filing of the notice of the lien, the Agency shall send an
 itemized statement of the medical expenses paid by the Agency for which the Agency
 seeks to perfect a lien to the persons listed in subsection (g) of this section. The
 notice provisions contained in this subsection may be waived by agreement of the parties.

 (i) The Agency may, on behalf of a recipient, file a civil action in the Superior Court
 in Washington County against a liable third party, the third party’s insurer, or both,
 to recover up to the full amount of medical expenses it has incurred on behalf of
 the recipient. The Agency may initiate this action only if:

 (1) the recipient has not initiated legal proceedings against the third party within one
 year after the occurrence of the injury, illness, or disease resulting, at least in
 part, from the actions or omissions, including negligence, of the third party; and

 (2) the time remaining under the statute of limitations for the action is six months or
 less.

 (j) The Attorney General shall be responsible for initiating actions on behalf of the
 Agency.

 (k) Whenever the Agency recovers under the lien and that recovery is the result of an
 action initiated by a recipient, the attorney for the recipient may withhold the Agency’s
 pro rata share of reasonably necessary attorney’s fees, costs, and expenses incurred
 in asserting the claim. If the Agency waives its right to reimbursement, it shall
 not be liable for any fees, costs, and expenses incurred by the recipient or attorney.

 (l) In cases in which the court has determined the amount of recovery allocated for past
 medical expenses, the Agency’s lien shall be limited to that amount. (Added 1995, No. 152 (Adj. Sess.), § 4; amended 2007, No. 192 (Adj. Sess.), § 6.014; 2011, No. 162 (Adj. Sess.), § E.307.3; 2013, No. 96 (Adj. Sess.), § 206.)

 § 1911. Tobacco manufacturers; liability for Medicaid expenditures 

 (a) After the State has paid medical assistance benefits to eligible persons for tobacco-related
 health conditions under this chapter, the State may recover from tobacco manufacturers
 the amount paid or likely to be paid for medical assistance to such persons, plus
 punitive damages, costs, reasonable attorney’s fees, and other appropriate relief.

 (b) The cause of action created in this section shall be a direct cause of action and
 not a subrogated cause of action. Affirmative defenses relating to subrogated causes
 of action shall not apply to this direct cause of action.

 (c) In order to recover under subsection (a) of this section, the State shall prove:

 (1) that the tobacco manufacturers were either negligent or produced a defective product
 unreasonably dangerous to the user or consumer who received or will receive medical
 assistance;

 (2) that the tobacco product caused the health conditions for which the State seeks reimbursement;
 and

 (3) the amount of compensatory damages and the appropriateness of any other relief sought.

 (d) The right of the State to bring a cause of action against a tobacco manufacturer under
 this section shall be independent of and not construed to affect any rights or causes
 of action by an individual Medicaid benefits recipient to recover damages or other
 relief as a result of a tobacco-related health condition. In the event that recovery
 of Medicaid expenditures has been achieved and the individual recipient thereafter
 recovers damages from a tobacco manufacturer, then the tobacco manufacturer shall
 be entitled to a setoff for the amount of any such Medicaid recovery which represents
 the expenditure on behalf of the individual recipient.

 (e) Existing common law and statutory actions available to recover Medicaid expenditures
 from a tobacco manufacturer, including direct action, are expressly preserved. An
 action brought pursuant to this section may be brought in addition to any existing
 common law or statutory action, or both, and shall not preempt, limit, or extinguish
 those actions.

 (f) In any action brought pursuant to this section:

 (1) Joint and several liability applies to any judgment in favor of the State, except
 as provided in subdivision (2) of this subsection.

 (2) The State may proceed under the market share theory for allocation of damages between
 or among tobacco manufacturers, provided that the tobacco products involved are substantially
 interchangeable among brands, and substantially similar factual and legal issues are
 involved in seeking recovery against each individual tobacco manufacturer. In the
 event the State elects to proceed under the market share theory, joint and several
 liability shall not apply.

 (3) Sums paid to all recipients may be recovered in a single action.

 (4) If the number of recipients is sufficiently large so that it is impracticable to identify
 the recipients, the court may require the State to release information on individual
 recipients including individual Medicaid and medical records that are in the possession,
 custody, or control of the State, to the extent necessary for the defendant to establish
 its defenses, subject to such orders as are necessary to maintain the privacy of the
 recipients and to prevent Medicaid fraud.

 (5) Evidence of statistical analysis may be admissible to prove or rebut the elements
 of subdivisions (c)(2) and (3) of this section.

 (g) Before the State enters into a contract with an attorney to represent the State in
 an action brought pursuant to this section, the contract shall be reviewed and approved
 by the Joint Fiscal Committee. The Joint Fiscal Committee shall approve the contract
 if it determines that the contract is reasonable under the circumstances. (Added 1997, No. 142 (Adj. Sess.), § 3, eff. April 23, 1998.)

 Subchapter 001A : NONPARTICIPATING TOBACCO MANUFACTURERS 

 § 1912. Findings and purpose 

 (a) Cigarette smoking presents serious public health concerns to the State of Vermont
 and to the citizens of Vermont. The Surgeon General has determined that smoking causes
 lung cancer, heart disease, and other serious diseases, and that there are hundreds
 of thousands of tobacco-related deaths in the United States each year. These diseases
 most often do not appear until many years after a person begins smoking.

 (b) Cigarette smoking also presents serious financial concerns for the State. Under certain
 health care programs, the State may have a legal obligation to provide medical assistance
 to eligible persons for health conditions associated with cigarette smoking, and those
 persons may have a legal entitlement to receive such medical assistance. Under these
 programs, the State pays millions of dollars each year to provide medical assistance
 to these persons for health conditions associated with cigarette smoking.

 (c) It is the policy of the State that financial burdens imposed on the State by cigarette
 smoking be borne by tobacco product manufacturers rather than by the State to the
 extent that such manufacturers either determine to enter into a settlement with the
 State or are found culpable by the courts.

 (d) On November 23, 1998, leading U.S. tobacco product manufacturers entered into a settlement
 agreement, entitled the “Master Settlement Agreement,” with the State. In return for
 a release of past, present, and certain future claims against these manufacturers
 as described therein, the Master Settlement Agreement obligates these manufacturers
 to:

 (1) pay substantial sums to the State, tied in part to their volume of sales;

 (2) fund a national foundation devoted to the interests of public health; and

 (3) make substantial changes in their advertising and marketing practices and corporate
 culture, with the intention of reducing underage smoking.

 (e) It would be contrary to the policy of the State if tobacco product manufacturers who
 determine not to enter into such a settlement could use a resulting cost advantage
 to derive large, short-term profits in the years before liability may arise, without
 ensuring that the State will have an eventual source of recovery from them if they
 are proven to have acted culpably. Consequently, it is in the interest of the State
 to require that such manufacturers establish a reserve fund to guarantee a source
 of compensation, and to prevent such manufacturers from deriving large, short-term
 profits and then becoming judgment-proof before liability may arise. (Added 1999, No. 130 (Adj. Sess.), § 1, eff. May 12, 2000.)

 § 1913. Definitions 

 As used in this subchapter:

 (1) “Adjusted for inflation” means increased in accordance with the formula for inflation
 adjustment set forth in Exhibit C to the Master Settlement Agreement.

 (2) “Affiliate” means a person who directly or indirectly owns or controls, is owned or
 controlled by, or is under common ownership or control with, another person. Solely
 for purposes of this definition, the terms “owns,” “is owned,” and “ownership” mean
 ownership of an equity interest, or the equivalent thereof, of ten percent or more,
 and the term “person” means an individual, partnership, committee, association, corporation,
 or any other organization or group of persons.

 (3) “Allocable share” means allocable share as that term is defined in the Master Settlement
 Agreement.

 (4)(A) “Cigarette” means any product that contains nicotine, is intended to be burned or
 heated under ordinary conditions of use, and consists of or contains:

 (i) any roll of tobacco wrapped in paper or in any substance not containing tobacco;

 (ii) tobacco, in any form, that is functional in the product, which, because of its appearance,
 the type of tobacco used in the filler, or its packaging and labeling, is likely to
 be offered to, or purchased by, consumers as a cigarette; or

 (iii) any roll of tobacco wrapped in any substance containing tobacco that, because of its
 appearance, the type of tobacco used in the filler, or its packaging and labeling,
 is likely to be offered to, or purchased by, consumers as a cigarette described in
 subdivision (i) of this subdivision (A).

 (B) The term “cigarette” includes “roll-your-own” (any tobacco that, because of its appearance,
 type, packaging, or labeling is suitable for use and likely to be offered to, or purchased
 by, consumers as tobacco for making cigarettes). For purposes of this definition,
 0.09 ounces of “roll-your-own” tobacco shall constitute one individual cigarette.

 (5) “Master Settlement Agreement” means the settlement agreement (and related documents)
 entered into on November 23, 1998 by the State and leading U.S. tobacco product manufacturers.

 (6) “Qualified escrow fund” means an escrow arrangement with a federally or State-chartered
 financial institution having no affiliation with any tobacco product manufacturer
 and having assets of at least $1,000,000,000.00, where such arrangement requires that
 such financial institution hold the escrowed funds’ principal for the benefit of releasing
 parties and prohibits the tobacco product manufacturer placing the funds into escrow,
 from using, accessing, or directing the use of the funds’ principal except as consistent
 with subsection 1914(b) of this title.

 (7) “Released claims” means released claims as that term is defined in the Master Settlement
 Agreement.

 (8) “Releasing parties” means releasing parties as that term is defined in the Master
 Settlement Agreement.

 (9)(A) “Tobacco product manufacturer” means an entity that, after May 12, 2000, directly
 (and not exclusively through any affiliate):

 (i) manufactures cigarettes anywhere that such manufacturer intends to be sold in the
 United States, including cigarettes intended to be sold in the United States through
 an importer (except where such importer is an original participating manufacturer
 (as that term is defined in the Master Settlement Agreement) that will be responsible
 for the payments under the Master Settlement Agreement with respect to such cigarettes
 as a result of the provisions of Subsection II(mm) of the Master Settlement Agreement,
 and that pays the taxes specified in Subsection II(z) of the Master Settlement Agreement,
 and provided that the manufacturer of such cigarettes does not market or advertise
 such cigarettes in the United States);

 (ii) is the first purchaser anywhere for resale in the United States of cigarettes manufactured
 anywhere that the manufacturer does not intend to be sold in the United States; or

 (iii) becomes a successor of an entity described in subdivision (i) or (ii) of this subdivision
 (A).

 (B) The term “tobacco product manufacturer” shall not include an affiliate of a tobacco
 product manufacturer, unless such affiliate itself falls within any of subdivisions
 (A)(i)-(iii) of this subdivision (9).

 (10) “Units sold” means the number of individual cigarettes sold in the State by the applicable
 tobacco product manufacturer (whether directly or through a distributor, retailer,
 or similar intermediary or intermediaries) during the year in question, as measured
 by excise taxes collected by the State on packs (or “roll-your-own” tobacco containers)
 bearing the excise tax stamp of the State. The Department of Taxes shall adopt rules
 as are necessary to ascertain the amount of the State excise tax paid on the cigarettes
 of such tobacco product manufacturer for each year. (Added 1999, No. 130 (Adj. Sess.), § 1, eff. May 12, 2000; amended 2015, No. 23, § 136.)

 § 1914. Requirements 

 (a) Any tobacco product manufacturer selling cigarettes to consumers within the State
 (whether directly or through a distributor, retailer, or similar intermediary or intermediaries)
 after May 12, 2000 shall do one of the following:

 (1) become a participating manufacturer (as that term is defined in Section II(jj) of
 the Master Settlement Agreement) and generally perform its financial obligations under
 the Master Settlement Agreement; or

 (2) place into a qualified escrow fund by April 15 of the year following the year in question,
 the following amounts (as such amounts are adjusted for inflation):

 (A) 2000: $0.0104712 per unit sold after May 12, 2000;

 (B) for each year, 2001 and 2002: $0.0136125 per unit sold;

 (C) for each year, 2003 through 2006: $0.0167539 per unit sold;

 (D) for 2007 and each year thereafter: $0.0188482 per unit sold.

 (b) A tobacco product manufacturer that places funds in escrow under subdivision (a)(2)
 of this section shall receive the interest or other appreciation on such funds as
 earned. Such funds themselves shall be released from escrow only under the following
 circumstances:

 (1) to pay a judgment or settlement on any released claim brought against such tobacco
 product manufacturer by the State or any releasing party located or residing in the
 State. Funds shall be released from escrow under this subdivision in the order in
 which they were placed into escrow and only to the extent and at the time necessary
 to make payments required under such judgment or settlement;

 (2) to the extent that a tobacco product manufacturer establishes that the amount it was
 required to place into escrow on account of units sold in the State in a particular
 year was greater than the Master Settlement Agreement payments, as determined pursuant
 to section IX(i) of that Agreement, including after final determination of all adjustments,
 that such manufacturer would have been required to make on account of such units sold
 had it been a participating manufacturer, the excess shall be released from escrow
 and revert back to such tobacco product manufacturer; or

 (3) to the extent not released from escrow under subdivision (1) or (2) of this subsection,
 funds shall be released from escrow and revert back to such tobacco product manufacturer
 25 years after the date on which they were placed into escrow.

 (c) Each tobacco product manufacturer that elects to place funds into escrow under subdivision
 (a)(2) of this section shall annually certify to the Attorney General of this State
 that it is in compliance with this section. The Attorney General may bring a civil
 action on behalf of the State against any tobacco product manufacturer that fails
 to place into escrow the funds required under this section. Any tobacco product manufacturer
 that fails in any year to place into escrow the funds required under this section
 shall:

 (1) Be required within 15 days to place such funds into escrow as shall bring it into
 compliance with this section. The court, upon a finding of a violation of subdivision
 (a)(2) or subsection (b) of this section, may impose a civil penalty, payable to the
 General Fund of the State, in an amount not to exceed five percent of the amount improperly
 withheld from escrow per day of the violation, and in a total amount not to exceed
 100 percent of the original amount improperly withheld from escrow.

 (2) In the case of a knowing violation, be required within 15 days to place such funds
 into escrow as shall bring it into compliance with this section. The court, upon a
 finding of a knowing violation of subdivision (a)(2) or subsection (b) of this section,
 may impose a civil penalty to be paid to the General Fund of the State in an amount
 not to exceed 15 percent of the amount improperly withheld from escrow per day of
 the violation, and in a total amount not to exceed 300 percent of the original amount
 improperly withheld from escrow.

 (3) In the case of a second knowing violation, be prohibited from selling cigarettes to
 consumers within the State whether directly or through a distributor, retailer, or
 similar intermediary for a period not to exceed two years.

 (4) Pay the reasonable attorney’s fees and costs of the Attorney General in bringing an
 action under this section.

 (d) Each failure to make an annual deposit required under this section shall constitute
 a separate violation. (Added 1999, No. 130 (Adj. Sess.), § 1, eff. May 12, 2000; amended 2003, No. 14, §§ 7, 8.)

 Subchapter 001B : COMPLEMENTARY LEGISLATION TO NONPARTICIPATING TOBACCO MANUFACTURERS STATUTES 

 § 1915. Findings and purpose 

 (a) The General Assembly finds that the provisions of this subchapter will enhance compliance
 with subchapter 1A of this chapter and further the policies and purposes of that subchapter.

 (b) The provisions of this subchapter are not intended to amend and shall not be interpreted
 as amending subchapter 1A of this chapter. (Added 2003, No. 14, § 1.)

 § 1916. Definitions 

 As used in this subchapter:

 (1) “Brand family” means all styles of cigarettes sold under the same trademark and differentiated
 from one another by means of additional modifiers or descriptors, including “menthol,”
 “lights,” “kings,” and “100s,” and includes a brand name (alone or in conjunction
 with any other word), trademark, logo, symbol, motto, selling message, recognizable
 pattern of colors, or any other indicia of product identification identical or similar
 to, or identifiable with, a previously known brand of cigarettes.

 (2) “Cigarette” has the same meaning as in subdivision 1913(4) of this title.

 (3) “Commissioner” means the Commissioner of Taxes.

 (4) “Wholesale dealer” has the same meaning as in 32 V.S.A. § 7702(16).

 (5) “Master Settlement Agreement” has the same meaning as in subdivision 1913(5) of this title.

 (6) “Nonparticipating manufacturer” means any tobacco product manufacturer that is not
 a participating manufacturer.

 (7) “Participating manufacturer” has the same meaning as in section II(jj) of the Master
 Settlement Agreement and all amendments to the Agreement.

 (8) “Qualified escrow fund” has the same meaning as in subdivision 1913(6) of this title.

 (9) “Retail dealer” has the same meaning as in 32 V.S.A. § 7702(10).

 (10) [Repealed.]

 (11) “Tobacco product manufacturer” has the same meaning as in subdivision 1913(9) of this title.

 (12) “Units sold” has the same meaning as in subdivision 1913(10) of this title. (Added 2003, No. 14, § 1; amended 2015, No. 57, § 83, eff. June 11, 2015; 2021, No. 20, § 301.)

 § 1917. Certifications 

 (a) Every tobacco product manufacturer whose cigarettes are sold in this State, whether
 directly or through a licensed wholesale dealer, retailer, or similar intermediary
 or intermediaries, shall execute and deliver on a form prescribed by the Attorney
 General a certification to the Attorney General not later than April 30 each year
 certifying under penalty of perjury that, as of the date of such certification, such
 tobacco product manufacturer either is a participating manufacturer or is in full
 compliance with subchapter 1A of this chapter, including all quarterly installment
 payments required by section 1922 of this title.

 (b) A participating manufacturer shall:

 (1) include in its certification a list of its brand families;

 (2) update its list 30 calendar days prior to any addition to or modification of its brand
 families by executing and delivering a supplemental certification to the Attorney
 General.

 (c) A nonparticipating manufacturer shall:

 (1) include in its certification:

 (A) a list of all of its brand families and the number of units sold for each brand family
 that were sold in the State during the previous calendar year;

 (B) a list of all of its brand families that have been sold in the State during the current
 calendar year;

 (C) a list of any brand family sold in the State during the preceding calendar year that
 is no longer being sold in the State as of the date of such certification; and

 (D) the name and business address of any other tobacco product manufacturer that has manufactured
 in the past calendar year or is currently manufacturing or selling any brand family
 listed in the nonparticipating manufacturer’s certification;

 (2) also certify:

 (A) that the nonparticipating manufacturer is registered to do business in the State or
 has appointed an in-state agent for service of process and provided notice thereof
 as required by this subchapter;

 (B) that the nonparticipating manufacturer has established and continues to maintain a
 qualified escrow fund; has executed an escrow agreement that both governs the qualified
 escrow fund and has been reviewed and approved by the Attorney General; and is in
 full compliance with subchapter 1A of this chapter;

 (C) the following information with respect to each qualified escrow fund established pursuant
 to subchapter 1A of this chapter:

 (i) the name, address, and telephone number of the financial institution where the nonparticipating
 manufacturer has established such qualified escrow fund;

 (ii) the account number of such qualified escrow fund and any subaccount number for the
 State;

 (iii) the amount the nonparticipating manufacturer placed in such fund for cigarettes sold
 in the State during the preceding calendar year, the dates and amount of each deposit,
 and evidence or verification as may be deemed necessary by the Attorney General to
 confirm the foregoing; and

 (iv) the amounts and dates of any withdrawal or transfer of funds the nonparticipating
 manufacturer made at any time from the fund; and

 (D) that the nonparticipating manufacturer is in full compliance with this subchapter
 and any rules adopted pursuant to this subchapter; and

 (3) update its list of brand families 30 calendar days prior to any addition or modification
 of its brand families by executing and delivering supplemental certification to the
 Attorney General.

 (d)(1) A tobacco product manufacturer may not include a brand family in its certification
 unless:

 (A) in the case of a participating manufacturer, the participating manufacturer affirms
 that the brand family shall be deemed to be its cigarettes for purposes of calculating
 its payments under the Master Settlement Agreement for the relevant year, in the volume
 and shares determined pursuant to the Master Settlement Agreement; and

 (B) in the case of a nonparticipating manufacturer, the nonparticipating manufacturer
 affirms that the brand family shall be deemed to be its cigarettes for purposes of
 subchapter 1A of this chapter.

 (2) Nothing in this subsection shall be construed as limiting or otherwise affecting the
 State’s right to contend that the manufacture or sale of a brand family constitutes
 cigarettes of a different tobacco product manufacturer for purposes of calculating
 payments under the Master Settlement Agreement or for purposes of subchapter 1A of
 this chapter.

 (e) A tobacco product manufacturer shall maintain all invoices and documentation of sales
 and other such information relied upon for such certification for a period of five
 years from the date the certification is executed, unless otherwise required by law
 to maintain them for a greater period of time. (Added 2003, No. 14, § 1; amended 2015, No. 57, § 84, eff. June 11, 2015; 2021, No. 20, § 302.)

 § 1918. Directory of cigarettes approved for stamping and sale 

 (a) The Attorney General shall develop and publish on its website a directory listing
 all tobacco product manufacturers that have provided current and accurate certifications
 conforming to the requirements of this subchapter (the “directory”) and all brand
 families that are listed in such certifications, except as noted in this subsection.

 (1) The Attorney General shall not include or retain in such directory any brand family
 of any tobacco product manufacturer that has failed to provide the required certification
 or whose certification the Attorney General determines is not in compliance with this
 subchapter, unless the Attorney General determines that such violation has been cured
 to the satisfaction of the Attorney General.

 (2) Neither a tobacco product manufacturer nor any brand family of the tobacco product
 manufacturer shall be included or retained in the directory if the Attorney General
 concludes that either:

 (A) any escrow funds required to be deposited pursuant to subchapter 1A of this chapter
 for any period related to any brand family, whether or not listed by such tobacco
 product manufacturer in its certification, have not been placed into a qualified escrow
 fund governed by an escrow agreement that has been approved by the Attorney General;
 or

 (B) any outstanding judgment, including interest thereon, obtained pursuant to subchapter
 1A of this chapter related to that tobacco product manufacturer or any brand family
 of the tobacco product manufacturer has not been fully satisfied.

 (b) The Attorney General shall update the directory in order to correct mistakes and add
 or remove a tobacco product manufacturer or brand family to keep the directory in
 conformity with the requirements of this subchapter, and the Attorney General shall
 transmit by e-mail or other practicable means to each stamping agent, and to any other
 entity that registers with the Department of Taxes or the Attorney General requesting
 receipt of the same, notice at least 30 days prior to any removal from the directory
 of any tobacco product manufacturer or brand family.

 (c) Unless otherwise provided by agreement between a licensed wholesale dealer and a tobacco
 product manufacturer, a licensed wholesale dealer shall be entitled to a refund from
 a tobacco product manufacturer for any money paid by the licensed wholesale dealer
 to the tobacco product manufacturer for any cigarettes of that tobacco product manufacturer
 still in the possession of the licensed wholesale dealer on the date of the Attorney
 General’s removal from the directory of that tobacco product manufacturer or the individual
 styles or brands of cigarettes of that tobacco product manufacturer. Also, unless
 otherwise provided by agreement between a retail dealer and a licensed wholesale dealer
 or a tobacco product manufacturer, a retail dealer shall be entitled to a refund from
 either a licensed wholesale dealer or a tobacco product manufacturer for any money
 paid by the retail dealer to the licensed wholesale dealer or tobacco product manufacturer
 for any cigarettes of that licensed wholesale dealer or tobacco product manufacturer
 still in the possession of the retail dealer on the date of the Attorney General’s
 removal from the directory of that tobacco product manufacturer or the individual
 styles or brands of cigarettes of that tobacco product manufacturer. The Attorney
 General shall not restore to the directory a tobacco product manufacturer or any individual
 styles or brands or cigarettes or, if applicable, brand families of that tobacco product
 manufacturer until the tobacco product manufacturer has paid all licensed wholesale
 dealers any refund due pursuant to this section.

 (d) The Commissioner shall refund to a licensed wholesale dealer any tax paid under 32 V.S.A. chapter 205 on products no longer saleable in the State under this subchapter.

 (e) A determination of the Attorney General not to list or to remove from the directory
 a tobacco product manufacturer, an individual style or brand of cigarette or, if applicable,
 brand family is a final agency decision with the same status as an agency decision
 or order in a contested case under the Vermont Administrative Procedure Act. A tobacco
 product manufacturer aggrieved by a determination of the Attorney General under this
 section may appeal to the Superior Court in Washington County, which shall review
 the matter pursuant to 3 V.S.A. § 815.

 (f) If a nonparticipating manufacturer who has not been listed on the directory for the
 previous three years files a certification pursuant to this section, or if the Attorney
 General determines that a nonparticipating manufacturer who has filed a certification
 pursuant to this section poses an elevated risk for noncompliance with sections 1912-1914 of this title, neither the nonparticipating manufacturer nor any of its brand families shall be
 included or retained on the directory unless and until the nonparticipating manufacturer
 or its U.S. importer that undertakes joint and several liability for the manufacturer’s
 performance in accordance with section 1925 of this title and amendments to that section has posted a bond in accordance with this subsection.
 Proof of the bond shall be submitted with the certification on a form approved by
 the Attorney General.

 (1) The bond required under this subsection shall be written in favor of the State of
 Vermont and shall be conditioned on the performance by the nonparticipating manufacturer
 or its U.S. importer that undertakes joint and several liability for the manufacturer’s
 performance in accordance with sections 1912-1914 and 1925 of this title. The bond shall be issued by a surety company in good standing and authorized to
 transact business in this State to secure the payment of any escrow due or that may
 become due from the nonparticipating manufacturer or its U.S. importer. The bond shall
 be maintained as a condition to the nonparticipating manufacturer and its brand families
 being included on the directory and shall remain in place for the pendency of such
 listing.

 (2) The bond required shall be $20,000.00 for a nonparticipating manufacturer that has
 not been listed on the Vermont directory for at least three years prior to the nonparticipating
 manufacturer’s application for certification.

 (3) The bond required shall be $50,000.00 for a nonparticipating manufacturer that poses
 an elevated risk for noncompliance with sections 1912-1914 of this title.

 (4) A nonparticipating manufacturer shall be deemed to pose an elevated risk for noncompliance
 with sections 1912-1914 of this title if it:

 (A) failed in the previous three years to make a full and timely escrow deposit due pursuant
 to section 1914 of this title, unless the failure was promptly cured upon notice;

 (B) was involuntarily removed from any state’s directory, unless the removal was determined
 to have been erroneous or illegal; or

 (C) has litigation pending against it in any state for escrow or for penalties, costs,
 or attorney’s fees related to noncompliance with any state’s escrow laws.

 (5) If a nonparticipating manufacturer that has posted a bond has failed to make or to
 have made on its behalf by an entity with joint and several liability escrow deposits
 equal to the full amount owed for a quarter within 15 days following the due date
 for the quarter under sections 1914 and 1925 of this title, the State may execute upon the bond first to recover delinquent escrow, which amount
 shall be deposited into a qualified escrow account under section 1914, and then to
 recover civil penalties and costs authorized under that section. Escrow obligations
 above the amount collected on the bond remain due from that nonparticipating manufacturer
 and, as provided in section 1925 of this title, from importers that sold its cigarettes in the calendar quarter. (Added 2003, No. 14, § 1; amended 2003, No. 113 (Adj. Sess.), § 2; 2013, No. 14, § 22; 2015, No. 57, § 85, eff. June 11, 2015; 2021, No. 20, § 303.)

 § 1919. Prohibition against the stamping and sale of cigarettes not included in the directory 

 No person shall affix a tax stamp to or sell or offer for sale in this State any package
 or container of cigarettes manufactured by a tobacco product manufacturer or belonging
 to a brand family that is not included in the directory, or sell, offer, or possess
 for sale, in this State, cigarettes of a tobacco product manufacturer or brand family
 not included in the directory. (Added 2003, No. 14, § 1.)

 § 1920. Agent for service of process 

 (a) Any nonresident or foreign nonparticipating manufacturer that has not registered to
 do business in the State as a foreign corporation or other business entity shall,
 as a condition precedent to having its brand families included or retained in the
 directory, appoint and continually engage without interruption the services of an
 agent in this State to act as agent for the service of process on whom all process,
 and any action or proceeding against it concerning or arising out of the enforcement
 of this subchapter or subchapter 1A of this chapter, or both, may be served in any
 manner authorized by law. Such service shall constitute legal and valid service of
 process on the nonparticipating manufacturer. The nonparticipating manufacturer shall
 provide the name, address, telephone number, and satisfactory proof of the appointment
 and availability of such agent to the Attorney General. The Secretary of State shall
 be designated as agent for service of process for importers of nonparticipating manufacturers
 located outside the United States. Service shall be made upon the Secretary of State
 in accordance with the provisions of 12 V.S.A. §§ 851 and 852.

 (b) The nonparticipating manufacturer shall provide notice to the Attorney General 30
 calendar days prior to termination of the authority of any such agent and shall further
 provide proof to the satisfaction of the Attorney General of the appointment of a
 new agent no less than five calendar days prior to the termination of an existing
 agent appointment. In the event an agent terminates an agent appointment, the nonparticipating
 manufacturer shall notify the Attorney General of said termination within five calendar
 days and shall include proof to the satisfaction of the Attorney General of the appointment
 of a new agent.

 (c) Any nonparticipating manufacturer whose cigarettes are sold in this State who has
 not appointed and engaged an agent as required by this section shall be deemed to
 have appointed the Secretary of State as such agent and may be proceeded against in
 courts of this State by service of process upon the Secretary of State; provided,
 however, that the appointment of the Secretary of State as such agent shall not satisfy
 the condition precedent, required by subsection (a) of this section, for having the
 individual styles or brands of cigarettes or, if applicable, brand families of the
 nonparticipating manufacturer included or retained in the directory. (Added 2003, No. 14, § 1; amended 2011, No. 166 (Adj. Sess.), § 5; 2021, No. 20, § 304.)

 § 1921. Reporting and sharing of information 

 (a) At the date specified in 32 V.S.A. § 7785 or 7813, for monthly reports from licensed wholesale dealers, or at such date and frequency
 as the Commissioner may require for other licensed wholesale dealers, which will be
 at least quarterly, each licensed wholesale dealer shall submit such information as
 the Commissioner requires to facilitate compliance with subchapter 1A of this chapter
 and this subchapter, including a list by brand family of the total number of cigarettes,
 or, in the case of roll-your-own tobacco, the equivalent stick count, as determined
 pursuant to the formula set forth in subchapter 1A of this chapter, for which the
 licensed wholesale dealer affixed stamps during the reporting period or otherwise
 paid the tax due for such cigarettes. Licensed wholesale dealers shall maintain, and
 make available to the Commissioner, all documentation and other information relied
 upon in reporting to the Commissioner for a period of six years.

 (b) The Attorney General may require at any time from a nonparticipating manufacturer
 proof from the financial institution in which a tobacco product manufacturer has established
 a qualified escrow fund for the purpose of compliance with subchapter 1A of this chapter
 of the amount of money being held in such fund on behalf of the State and the dates
 of deposits, and listing the amounts of all withdrawals from such fund and the dates
 thereof; any such nonparticipating manufacturer shall provide the requisite proof
 within 10 business days of the date it is requested. In the event that a nonparticipating
 manufacturer fails to provide the requisite proof within said time period, the Attorney
 General shall remove the nonparticipating manufacturer and all of its styles or brands
 of cigarettes from the directory.

 (c) The Attorney General may require a licensed wholesale dealer or tobacco product manufacturer
 to submit any additional information, including samples of the packaging or labeling
 of each brand family, as is necessary to enable the Attorney General to determine
 whether a tobacco product manufacturer is in compliance with this subchapter and subchapter
 1A of this chapter.

 (d) The Attorney General is authorized to disclose to the Commissioner and, notwithstanding
 the provisions of 32 V.S.A. chapter 103, the Commissioner is authorized to disclose
 to the Attorney General any information received under this subchapter or subchapter
 1A of this chapter, if such information is requested by the other for the purposes
 of determining compliance with or enforcing the provisions of those statutes. The
 Attorney General and Commissioner shall share with each other the information received
 under this subchapter or subchapter 1A of this chapter, and may share such information
 with other federal, State, or local agencies as necessary for the purposes of enforcement
 of this subchapter, the State’s nonparticipating tobacco manufacturers’ statutes,
 or corresponding laws of other states. (Added 2003, No. 14, § 1; amended 2003, No. 113 (Adj. Sess.), § 1; 2015, No. 57, § 86, eff. June 11, 2015.)

 § 1922. Quarterly escrow deposits 

 To promote compliance with the provisions of this subchapter, the Attorney General
 may adopt rules requiring a nonparticipating manufacturer to make the escrow deposits
 required by subchapter 1A of this chapter in quarterly installments during the year
 in which the sales covered by such deposits are made. (Added 2003, No. 14, § 1; amended 2015, No. 23, § 137.)

 § 1923. Penalties and other remedies 

 (a) In addition to or in lieu of any other civil or criminal remedy provided by law, upon
 a determination that a stamping agent has violated this subchapter or any rule adopted
 pursuant to this subchapter, the Attorney General may, for each violation of this
 subchapter, also impose a civil penalty in an amount not to exceed the greater of
 500 percent of the retail value of the cigarettes sold, offered for sale, or possessed
 for sale in violation of this subchapter or $5,000.00. Each stamp affixed and each
 sale or offer to sell cigarettes in violation of section 1919 of this subchapter shall
 constitute a separate violation.

 (b) The Attorney General may seek an injunction to restrain a threatened or actual violation
 of this subchapter by a stamping agent and to compel the stamping agent to comply
 with the provisions of this subchapter. In any action brought pursuant to this section,
 the State shall be entitled to recover the costs of investigation, expert witness
 fees, costs of the action, and reasonable attorney’s fees.

 (c) It shall be unlawful for a person to:

 (1) Sell or distribute cigarettes that the person knows or should know are intended for
 distribution or sale in the State in violation of this subchapter.

 (2) Acquire, hold, own, possess, transport, import, or cause to be imported cigarettes
 that the person knows or should know are intended for distribution or sale in the
 State in violation of this subchapter. A violation of this section shall be a misdemeanor
 punishable by imprisonment for not more than one year and a fine of not more than
 $5,000.00, or both.

 (d) A person who violates section 1919 of this title engages in an unfair and deceptive trade practice in violation of the State’s Consumer
 Protection Act, 9 V.S.A. § 2451 et seq.

 (e) If a court determines that a person has violated the provisions of this subchapter,
 the court shall order any profits, gain, gross receipts, or other benefit from the
 violation to be disgorged and paid to the State Treasurer for deposit in the Tobacco
 Litigation Settlement Fund established pursuant to 32 V.S.A. § 435a.

 (f) Unless otherwise expressly provided, the penalties or remedies, or both, provided
 by this subchapter are cumulative to each other and to the penalties or remedies,
 or both, available under all other laws of this State. (Added 2003, No. 14, § 1; amended 2011, No. 109 (Adj. Sess.), § 3, eff. May 8, 2012; 2011, No. 136 (Adj. Sess.), § 1b, eff. May 18, 2012; 2021, No. 20, § 305.)

 § 1924. Miscellaneous provisions 

 (a) The first report of stamping agents required by section 1921 of this title shall be due 30 days after the effective date of this subchapter; the initial certification
 of a tobacco product manufacturer required by section 1917 of this title shall be due 45 days after the effective date of this subchapter; and the directory
 described in section 1918 of this title shall be published or made available within 120 days after the effective date of
 this subchapter.

 (b) Both the Attorney General and the Commissioner may adopt rules necessary to effect
 the purposes of this subchapter.

 (c) In any action brought by the State to enforce the provisions of this subchapter, the
 State shall be entitled to recover the costs of investigation, expert witness fees,
 costs of the action, and reasonable attorney’s fees.

 (d) If a court of competent jurisdiction finds that the provisions of this subchapter
 and subchapter 1A of this chapter conflict and cannot be harmonized, then such provisions
 of subchapter 1A shall control. If any section, subsection, subdivision, sentence,
 or phrase of this subchapter causes subchapter 1A of this chapter to no longer constitute
 a qualifying act or model statute, as those terms are defined in the Master Settlement
 Agreement, then that portion of this subchapter shall not apply. If any section, subsection,
 subdivision, sentence, or phrase of this subchapter is for any reason held to be invalid,
 unlawful, or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the
 remaining portions of this subchapter or any part thereof. (Added 2003, No. 14, § 1; amended 2021, No. 20, § 306.)

 § 1925. Joint and several liability of importers on nonparticipating manufacturer’s brand
 families 

 Each nonparticipating manufacturer located outside the United States and each importer
 of any nonparticipating manufacturer’s brand families that are sold in the State shall
 bear joint and several liability for the deposit of all escrow due and payment of
 all penalties, costs, and attorney’s fees imposed under this subchapter. The nonparticipating
 manufacturer, as a condition to being listed on the directory, shall provide a declaration
 on a form prescribed by the Attorney General from each of its importers of any of
 its brand families to be sold in the State that the importer accepts joint and several
 liability for all escrow deposits due pursuant to section 1914 of this title and for all penalties, costs, and attorney’s fees assessed under section 1914 of this title. (Added 2011, No. 166 (Adj. Sess.), § 4, eff. May 16, 2012.)

 Subchapter 002 : HEALTH CARE IMPROVEMENT PROGRAM 

 § 1950. Purpose 

 (a) The purpose of this subchapter is to establish assessments on health care providers,
 which funds shall be used in the State’s health care program in such a way as to be
 eligible for federal financial participation.

 (b) The Secretary and the Commissioner shall interpret and administer the provisions of
 this subchapter so as to maximize federal financial participation and avoid disallowances
 of federal financial participation.

 (c) If the purpose of this subchapter can no longer be accomplished, the Secretary of
 Human Services shall so notify the General Assembly on or before the following February
 15. (Added 1991, No. 253 (Adj. Sess.), § 1; amended 1993, No. 56, § 1, eff. June 3, 1993; 2005, No. 71, § 282; 2009, No. 156 (Adj. Sess.), § I.51.)

 § 1951. Definitions 

 As used in this subchapter:

 (1) “Assessment” means a tax levied on a health care provider pursuant to this chapter.

 (2)(A) “Home health services” means any of the following:

 (i) those medically necessary, intermittent, skilled home health services provided by
 Medicare-certified home health agencies of the type covered under Title XVIII (Medicare)
 or XIX (Medicaid) of the Social Security Act;

 (ii) services covered under the adult and pediatric High Technology Home Care programs
 as of January 1, 2015;

 (iii) personal care, respite care, and companion care services provided through the Choices
 for Care program contained within Vermont’s Global Commitment to Health Section 1115
 demonstration; and

 (iv) hospice services.

 (B) The term “home health services” shall not include any other service provided by a
 home health agency, including:

 (i) private duty services;

 (ii) case management services, except to the extent that such services are performed in
 order to establish an individual’s eligibility for services described in subdivision
 (A) of this subdivision (2);

 (iii) homemaker services;

 (iv) adult day services;

 (v) group-directed attendant care services;

 (vi) primary care services;

 (vii) nursing home room and board when a hospice patient is in a nursing home; and

 (viii) health clinics, including occupational health, travel, and flu clinics.

 (C) The term “home health services” shall not include any services provided by a home
 health agency under any other program or initiative unless the services fall into
 one or more of the categories described in subdivision (A) of this subdivision (2).
 Other programs and initiatives include:

 (i) the Flexible Choices or Assistive Devices options under the Choices for Care program
 contained within Vermont’s Global Commitment to Health Section 1115 demonstration;

 (ii) services provided to children under the early and periodic screening, diagnostic,
 and treatment Medicaid benefit;

 (iii) services provided pursuant to the Money Follows the Person demonstration project;

 (iv) services provided pursuant to the Traumatic Brain Injury Program; and

 (v) maternal-child wellness services, including services provided through the Nurse Family
 Partnership program.

 (3) “Commissioner” means the Commissioner of Vermont Health Access.

 (4) [Repealed.]

 (5) “Health care provider” means any hospital, nursing home, intermediate care facility
 for people with intellectual disabilities, home health agency, or retail pharmacy.

 (6) “Home health agency” means an entity that has received a certificate of need from
 the State to provide home health services or is certified to provide services pursuant
 to 42 U.S.C. § 1395x(o).

 (7) “Hospital” means a hospital licensed under 18 V.S.A. chapter 43.

 (8) “Intermediate Care Facility for People with Developmental Disabilities” (ICF/DD) means
 a facility that provides long-term health related care to residents with developmental
 disabilities pursuant to subdivision 1902(a)(31) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. § 1396a(a)(31)).

 (9) “Mental hospital” or “psychiatric facility” means a hospital as defined in 18 V.S.A. § 1902(1)(B) or (H), but does not include psychiatric units of general hospitals.

 (10) “Net patient revenues” means a provider’s gross charges related to patient care services
 less any deductions for bad debts, charity care, contractual allowances, and other
 payer discounts.

 (11) “Nursing home” means a health care facility licensed under chapter 71 of this title.

 (12) “Department” means the Department of Vermont Health Access.

 (13) “Pharmacy” means a Vermont drug outlet licensed by the Vermont State Board of Pharmacy
 pursuant to 26 V.S.A. chapter 36 in which prescription drugs are sold at retail.

 (14) “Secretary” means the Secretary of Human Services.

 (15) “Ambulance agency” means an ambulance agency licensed pursuant to 18 V.S.A. chapter 17. (Added 1991, No. 94, § 1; amended 1991, No. 253 (Adj. Sess.), § 2; 1993, No. 56 § 1, eff. June 3, 1993; 1999, No. 49, § 200; 1999, No. 147 (Adj. Sess.), § 4; 2005, No. 71, § 283; 2005, No. 215 (Adj. Sess.), § 318; 2009, No. 156 (Adj. Sess.), § I.52; 2013, No. 96 (Adj. Sess.), § 207; 2013, No. 131 (Adj. Sess.), § 44, eff. May 20, 2014; 2015, No. 134 (Adj. Sess.), § 29; 2017, No. 73, § 18, eff. June 13, 2017; 2019, No. 6, § 75, eff. April 22, 2019.)

 § 1952. General provisions 

 (a) The Secretary of Human Services shall adopt rules necessary for the implementation
 of this subchapter.

 (b) The Department may use not more than one percent of the assessments received under
 the provisions of this subchapter for necessary administrative expenses associated
 with this subchapter.

 (c) The budget of any hospital assessed under the provisions of this subchapter that includes
 a nursing home, home health agency, or physician’s office practice shall have its
 assessment based only on the hospital portion of its budget. The nursing home and
 home health agency components of the budget shall be assessed separately as provided
 for in this subchapter.

 (d) No health care provider conducted, maintained, or operated by the U.S. government
 shall be subject to an assessment levied under the provisions of this subchapter.

 (e) Each assessment imposed pursuant to this subchapter is the liability of the health
 care provider and no portion thereof shall be charged directly to any patient or resident,
 but may be treated as a cost of doing business for the purpose of determining rates
 and charges.

 (f) If a health care provider fails to pay its assessments under this subchapter according
 to the schedule or a variation thereof adopted by the Commissioner, the Commissioner
 may, after notice and opportunity for hearing, deduct these assessment arrears and
 any late-payment penalties from Medicaid payments otherwise due to the provider. The
 deduction of these assessment arrears may be made in one or more installments on a
 schedule to be determined by the Commissioner. (Added 1991, No. 94, § 1; amended 1991, No. 253 (Adj. Sess.), § 3; 1993, No. 56 § 1, eff. June 3, 1993; 1999, No. 49, § 201; 2005, No. 71, § 284; 2007, No. 190 (Adj. Sess.), § 49, eff. June 6, 2008; 2009, No. 156 (Adj. Sess.), § I.53.)

 § 1953. Hospital assessment 

 (a) Hospitals shall be subject to an annual assessment as follows:

 (1) Beginning July 1, 2012, each hospital’s annual assessment, except for hospitals assessed
 under subdivision (2) of this subsection, shall be six percent of its net patient
 revenues (less chronic, skilled, and swing bed revenues).

 (2) Beginning July 1, 2004, each mental hospital or psychiatric facility’s annual assessment
 shall be 4.21 percent, provided that the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
 grants a waiver to the uniform assessment rate pursuant to 42 C.F.R. § 433.68(e). If the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services fails to grant a waiver, mental
 hospitals and psychiatric facilities shall be assessed under subdivision (1) of this
 subsection.

 (b) Each hospital shall be notified in writing by the Department of the assessment made
 pursuant to this section. If no hospital submits a request for reconsideration under
 section 1958 of this title, the assessment shall be considered final.

 (c) Each hospital shall submit its assessment to the Department according to a payment
 schedule adopted by the Commissioner. Variations in payment schedules shall be permitted
 as deemed necessary by the Commissioner.

 (d) Any hospital that fails to make a payment to the Department on or before the specified
 schedule, or under any schedule for delayed payments established by the Commissioner,
 shall be assessed not more than $1,000.00. The Commissioner may waive this late payment
 assessment provided for in this subsection for good cause shown by the hospital. (Added 1991, No. 94, § 1; amended 1993, No. 56, § 1, eff. June 3, 1993; 1995, No. 5, § 26, eff. March 3, 1995; 1995, No. 14, § 2, eff. April 12, 1995; 1997, No. 59, §§ 69, 70, eff. June 30, 1997; 1999, No. 49, § 199; 2001, No. 65, § 13; 2003, No. 66, § 306, see effective date note set out below; 2003, No. 163 (Adj. Sess.), § 7; 2005, No. 71, § 285; 2007, No. 190 (Adj. Sess.), § 47, eff. June 6, 2008; 2009, No. 156 (Adj. Sess.), § E.309.4; 2011, No. 45, § 24, eff. May 24, 2011; 2011, No. 128 (Adj. Sess.), § 36.)

 § 1954. Nursing home assessment 

 (a) Beginning July 1, 2011, each nursing home’s annual assessment shall be $4,509.57,
 and beginning October 1, 2011, $4,919.53 per bed licensed pursuant to section 7105 of this title on June 30 of the immediately preceding fiscal year. The annual assessment for each
 bed licensed as of the beginning of the fiscal year shall be prorated for the number
 of days during which the bed was actually licensed and any overpayment shall be refunded
 to the facility. To receive the refund, a facility shall notify the Commissioner in
 writing of the size of the decrease in the number of its licensed beds and dates on
 which the beds ceased to be licensed.

 (b) The Department shall provide written notification of the assessment amount to each
 nursing home. The assessment amount determined shall be considered final unless the
 home requests a reconsideration. Requests for reconsideration shall be subject to
 the provisions of section 1958 of this title.

 (c) Each nursing home shall submit its assessment to the Department according to a schedule
 adopted by the Commissioner. The Commissioner may permit variations in the schedule
 of payment as deemed necessary.

 (d) Any nursing home that fails to make a payment to the Department on or before the specified
 schedule, or under any schedule of delayed payments established by the Commissioner,
 shall be assessed not more than $1,000.00. The Commissioner may waive the late-payment
 assessment provided for in this subsection for good cause shown by the nursing home. (Added 1991, No. 94, § 1; amended 1991, No. 253 (Adj. Sess.), § 4; 1993, No. 56, § 1, eff. June 3, 1993; 1995, No. 5, § 27, eff. March 9, 1995; 1995, No. 14, § 3, eff. April 12, 1995; 1999, No. 49, § 202; 2001, No. 65, § 14; 2001, No. 142 (Adj. Sess.), § 120a; 2001, No. 143 (Adj. Sess.), § 49, eff. June 21, 2002; 2003, No. 66, § 307; 2003, No. 163 (Adj. Sess.), § 8; 2005, No. 71, § 286; 2007, No. 76, § 9, eff. June 7, 2007; 2007, No. 190 (Adj. Sess.), § 50, eff. June 6, 2008; 2009, No. 156 (Adj. Sess.), § I.54; 2011, No. 45, § 25, eff. May 24, 2011.)

 § 1955. ICF/DD assessment 

 (a) Beginning October 1, 2011, each ICF/DD’s annual assessment shall be 5.9 percent of
 the ICF/DD’s total annual direct and indirect expenses for the most recently settled
 ICF/DD audit.

 (b) The Department shall provide written notification of the assessment amount to each
 ICF/DD. The assessment amount determined shall be considered final unless the facility
 requests a reconsideration. Requests for reconsideration shall be subject to the provisions
 of section 1958 of this title.

 (c) Each ICF/DD shall remit its assessment to the Department according to a schedule adopted
 by the Commissioner. The Commissioner may permit variations in the schedule of payment
 as deemed necessary.

 (d) Any ICF/DD that fails to make a payment to the Department on or before the specified
 schedule, or under any schedule of delayed payments established by the Commissioner,
 shall be assessed not more than $1,000.00. The Commissioner may waive the late-payment
 assessment provided for in this subsection for good cause shown by the ICF/DD. (Added 1991, No. 94, § 1; amended 1993, No. 56, § 1, eff. June 3, 1993; 2005, No. 71, § 287; 2007, No. 190 (Adj. Sess.), § 48, eff. June 6, 2008; 2009, No. 156 (Adj. Sess.), § I.55; 2011, No. 45, § 26, eff. May 24, 2011; 2013, No. 96 (Adj. Sess.), § 208.)

 § 1955a. Repealed. 2021, No. 73 § 13, eff. July 1, 2023. 

 (Added 1999, No. 49, § 203; amended 2001, No. 65, § 15; 2003, No. 66, § 309; 2005, No. 71, § 288; 2009, No. 47, § 15; 2009, No. 156 (Adj. Sess.), § I.56; 2011, No. 45, § 23, eff. May 24, 2011; 2013, No. 73, § 55, eff. July 1, 2005, eff. June 5, 2013; 2017, No. 73, § 18a, eff. June 13, 2017; repealed by 2021, No. 73, § 13, eff. July 1, 2023.)

 § 1955b. Pharmacy assessment 

 (a) Beginning July 1, 2005, each pharmacy’s monthly assessment shall be $0.10 for each
 prescription filled and refilled.

 (b) Each pharmacy shall declare and provide supporting documentation to the Commissioner
 of the total number of prescriptions filled and refilled in the previous month and
 remit the assessment due for that month. The declaration and payment shall be due
 by the end of the following month.

 (c) Each pharmacy shall submit its assessment payment to the Department monthly. Variations
 in payment timing shall be permitted as deemed necessary by the Commissioner.

 (d) Any pharmacy that fails to pay an assessment to the Department on or before the due
 date shall be assessed a late payment penalty of two percent of the assessment amount
 for each month it remains unpaid; but late payment penalties for any one quarter shall
 not exceed $500.00. The Commissioner may waive a penalty under this subsection for
 good cause shown by the pharmacy, as determined by the Commissioner in his or her
 discretion. (Added 2005, No. 71, § 289; amended 2009, No. 156 (Adj. Sess.), § I.57.)

 § 1956. Proceeds from assessments 

 All assessments, including late-payment assessments, from health care providers under
 this subchapter shall be deposited in the General Fund. No provision of this subchapter
 shall permit the State to reduce the level of State funds expended on the nursing
 home Medicaid program in any fiscal year below the level expended in fiscal year 1991
 from the General Fund for the nursing home Medicaid program. (Added 1991, No. 94, § 1; amended 1991, No. 253 (Adj. Sess.), § 6; 1993, No. 56, § 1, eff. June 3, 1993; 1995, No. 14, § 4, eff. April 12, 1995; 1995, No. 174 (Adj. Sess.), § 3; 1999, No. 49, § 204; 1999, No. 147 (Adj. Sess.), § 4; 2001, No. 63, § 99a; 2001, No. 65, § 16; 2001, No. 143 (Adj. Sess.), § 50, eff. June 21, 2002; 2003, No. 66, § 310; 2003, No. 163 (Adj. Sess.), § 9; 2005, No. 71, § 291; 2005, No. 215 (Adj. Sess.), § 313; 2019, No. 6, § 76, eff. April 22, 2019.)

 § 1957. Audits 

 The Commissioner may require the submission of audited information as needed from
 health care providers to determine that amounts received from health care providers
 were correct. If an audit identifies amounts received due to errors by the Department,
 the Commissioner shall make payments to any health care provider that the audit reveals
 paid amounts it should not have been required to pay. Payments made under this section
 shall be made from the Fund. (Added 1991, No. 94, § 1; amended 1991, No. 253 (Adj. Sess.), § 7; 1993, No. 56, § 1, eff. June 3, 1993; 2005, No. 71, § 292; 2009, No. 156 (Adj. Sess.), § I.58.)

 § 1958. Appeals 

 (a) Any health care provider may submit a written request to the Department for reconsideration
 of the determination of the assessment within 20 days of notice of the determination.
 The request shall be accompanied by written materials setting forth the basis for
 reconsideration. If requested, the Department shall hold a hearing within 90 days
 from the date on which the reconsideration request was received. The Department shall
 mail written notice of the date, time, and place of the hearing to the health care
 provider at least 30 days before the date of the hearing. On the basis of the evidence
 submitted to the Department or presented at the hearing, the Department shall reconsider
 and may adjust the assessment. Within 20 days following the hearing, the Department
 shall provide notice in writing to the health care provider of the final determination
 of the amount it is required to pay based on any adjustments made by it. Proceedings
 under this section are not subject to the requirements of 3 V.S.A. chapter 25.

 (b) Upon request, the Commissioner shall enter into nonbinding arbitration with any health
 care provider dissatisfied with the Department’s decision regarding the amount it
 is required to pay. The arbitrator shall be selected by mutual consent, and compensation
 shall be provided jointly.

 (c) Any health care provider may appeal the decision of the Department as to the amount
 it is required to pay either before or after arbitration, to the Superior Court having
 jurisdiction over the health care provider. (Added 1991, No. 94, § 1; amended 1991, No. 253 (Adj. Sess.), § 8; 1993, No. 56, § 1, eff. June 3, 1993; 2005, No. 71, § 293; 2009, No. 156 (Adj. Sess.), § I.59; 2017, No. 210 (Adj. Sess.), § 4, eff. June 1, 2018.)

 § 1959. Ambulance agency assessment 

 (a)(1) The annual assessment for each ambulance agency shall be 3.3 percent of the ambulance
 agency’s annual net patient revenues for services delivered to patients in Vermont
 during the most recent annual fiscal period. As used in this section, “net patient
 revenues” means the total amount of payments an ambulance agency received during the
 fiscal period from Medicaid, Medicare, commercial insurance, and all other payers
 as payment for services rendered. The term does not include municipal appropriations,
 donations from any source, or any other funding unrelated to the delivery of health
 care services.

 (2) The Department shall determine the appropriate fiscal period as necessary to ensure
 compliance with federal law.

 (3) Ambulance agencies shall remit the assessment amount to the Department annually on
 or before June 1.

 (b) The Department shall provide written notification of the assessment amount to each
 ambulance agency. The assessment amount determined shall be considered final unless
 the agency requests reconsideration. Requests for reconsideration shall be subject
 to the provisions of section 1958 of this title.

 (c) Each ambulance agency shall remit its assessment to the Department according to a
 schedule adopted by the Commissioner. The Commissioner may permit variations in the
 schedule of payment as deemed necessary.

 (d) Any ambulance agency that fails to make a payment to the Department on or before the
 specified schedule, or under any schedule of delayed payments established by the Commissioner,
 shall be assessed not more than $1,000.00. The Commissioner may waive the late-payment
 assessment provided in this subsection for good cause shown by the ambulance agency. (Added 2015, No. 134 (Adj. Sess.), § 30; amended 2017, No. 73, § 9, eff. June 13, 2017; 2017, No. 210 (Adj. Sess.), § 5, eff. June 1, 2018.)

 Subchapter 003 : VERMONT HEALTH ACCESS PLAN 

 § 1971. Repealed. 2011, No. 171 (Adj. Sess.), § 41(h), effective January 1, 2014. 

 § 1972. Repealed. 2005, No. 93 (Adj. Sess.), § 16. 

 §§ 1973, 1974. Repealed. 2011, No. 171 (Adj. Sess.), § 41(h), effective January 1, 2014. 

 Subchapter 003A : CATAMOUNT HEALTH ASSISTANCE PROGRAM 

 §§ 1981-1985. Repealed. 2013, No. 79, § 52(c), effective January 1, 2014. 

 § 1986. Repealed. 2011, No. 75 (Adj. Sess.), § 83. 

 Subchapter 004 : COVERAGE FOR DENTAL SERVICES 

 § 1991. Definitions 

 As used in this chapter:

 (1) “Dental hygienist” means an individual licensed to practice as a dental hygienist
 under 26 V.S.A. chapter 12.

 (2) “Dental services” means preventive, diagnostic, or corrective procedures related to
 the teeth and associated structures of the oral cavity.

 (3) “Dental therapist” means an individual licensed to practice as a dental therapist
 under 26 V.S.A. chapter 12.

 (4) “Dentist” means an individual licensed to practice dentistry under 26 V.S.A. chapter
 12. (Added 2019, No. 72, § E.306.1.)

 § 1992. Medicaid coverage for adult dental services 

 (a) Vermont Medicaid shall provide coverage for medically necessary dental services provided
 by a dentist, dental therapist, or dental hygienist working within the scope of the
 provider’s license as follows:

 (1) Preventive services, including prophylaxis and fluoride treatment, with no co-payment.
 These services shall not be counted toward the annual maximum benefit amount set forth
 in subdivision (2) of this subsection.

 (2)(A) Diagnostic, restorative, and endodontic procedures, to a maximum of $1,500.00 per
 calendar year, provided that the Department of Vermont Health Access may adjust the
 maximum pursuant to the process outlined in subdivision (B) of this subdivision (2)
 and may approve expenditures in excess of that amount when exceptional medical circumstances
 so require. Exceptional medical circumstances include emergency dental services, as
 defined by the Department by rule.

 (B) The Department may set the maximum for coverage of diagnostic, restorative, and endodontic
 procedures in excess of the amount set forth in subdivision (A) of this subdivision
 (2) for a calendar year based on the Department’s annual assessment of available funds,
 provided that the Department submit a report to the House Committee on Health Care,
 the Senate Committee on Health and Welfare, and the House and Senate Committees on
 Appropriations, or to the Joint Fiscal Committee if the General Assembly is not in
 session, each time the Department adjusts the maximum.

 (C) The following individuals shall not be subject to the annual maximum benefit amount
 set forth in this subdivision (2):

 (i) individuals served through the Community Rehabilitation and Treatment and Developmental
 Disability Services programs pursuant to Vermont’s Global Commitment to Health Section
 1115 demonstration; and

 (ii) Medicaid beneficiaries who are pregnant or in the postpartum eligibility period, as
 defined by the Department by rule.

 (3) Other dental services as determined by the Department by rule.

 (b) The Department of Vermont Health Access shall develop a reimbursement structure for
 dental services in the Vermont Medicaid program that encourages dentists, dental therapists,
 and dental hygienists to provide preventive care. (Added 2019, No. 72, § E.306.1; amended 2021, No. 130 (Adj. Sess.), § 1, eff. May 24, 2022; 2023, No. 51, § 1, eff. July 1, 2023; 2023, No. 78, § E.307.1, eff. July 1, 2023.)

 §§ 1992a-1996. Repealed. 2005, No. 71, § 321(a), eff. January 1, 2006. 

 Subchapter 005 : PRESCRIPTION DRUG COST CONTAINMENT 

 § 1997. Definitions 

 As used in this subchapter:

 (1) “Board” or “Drug Utilization Review Board” means the Drug Utilization Review Board
 established in connection with the Medicaid program.

 (2) “Commissioner” means the Commissioner of Vermont Health Access.

 (3) “Health benefit plan” means a health benefit plan with prescription drug coverage
 offered or administered by a health insurer, as defined by 18 V.S.A. § 9402, and the out-of-state counterparts to such plans. The term includes:

 (A) any State public assistance program with a health benefit plan that provides coverage
 of prescription drugs;

 (B) any health benefit plan offered by or on behalf of the State of Vermont or any instrumentality
 of the State providing coverage for government employees and their dependents that
 agrees to participate in the Program; and

 (C) any insured or self-insured health benefit plan that agrees to participate in the
 Program.

 (4) “Department” means the Department of Vermont Health Access.

 (5) “Participating health benefit plan” means a health benefit plan that has agreed to
 participate in one or more components of the Pharmacy Best Practices and Cost Control
 Program.

 (6) “Program” or “the Pharmacy Best Practices and Cost Control Program” means the Pharmacy
 Best Practices and Cost Control Program established by this subchapter.

 (7) “State public assistance program” includes the Medicaid program, VPharm, the State
 Children’s Health Insurance Program, the State of Vermont AIDS Medication Assistance
 Program, the General Assistance program, the Pharmacy Discount Plan Program, and the
 out-of-state counterparts to such programs. (Added 2001, No. 127 (Adj. Sess.), § 1, eff. June 13, 2002; amended 2005, No. 174 (Adj. Sess.), § 100; 2009, No. 156 (Adj. Sess.), § I.61; 2013, No. 79, § 25, eff. Jan. 1, 2014.)

 § 1998. Pharmacy Best Practices and Cost Control Program established 

 (a) The Commissioner of Vermont Health Access shall establish and maintain a Pharmacy
 Best Practices and Cost Control Program designed to reduce the cost of providing prescription
 drugs, while maintaining high quality in prescription drug therapies. The Program
 shall include:

 (1) use of an evidence-based preferred list of covered prescription drugs that identifies
 preferred choices within therapeutic classes for particular diseases and conditions,
 including generic alternatives and over-the-counter drugs;

 (2) utilization review procedures, including a prior authorization review process;

 (3) any strategy designed to negotiate with pharmaceutical manufacturers to lower the
 cost of prescription drugs for Program participants, including a supplemental rebate
 program;

 (4) alternative pricing mechanisms, including consideration of using maximum allowable
 cost pricing for generic and other prescription drugs;

 (5) alternative coverage terms, including consideration of providing coverage of over-the-counter
 drugs where cost-effective in comparison to prescription drugs, and authorizing coverage
 of dosages capable of permitting the consumer to split each pill if cost-effective
 and medically appropriate for the consumer;

 (6) a simple, uniform prescription form, designed to implement the preferred drug list,
 and to enable prescribers and consumers to request an exception to the preferred drug
 list choice with a minimum of cost and time to prescribers, pharmacists, and consumers;

 (7) a joint pharmaceuticals purchasing consortium as provided for in subdivision (c)(1)
 of this section; and

 (8) any other cost containment activity adopted, by rule, by the Commissioner that is
 designed to reduce the cost of providing prescription drugs while maintaining high
 quality in prescription drug therapies.

 (b) The Commissioner shall implement the Pharmacy Best Practices and Cost Control Program
 for Medicaid and all other State public assistance program health benefit plans to
 the extent permitted by federal law.

 (c)(1) The Commissioner may implement the Pharmacy Best Practices and Cost Control Program
 for any other health benefit plan within or outside this State that agrees to participate
 in the Program. For entities in Vermont, the Commissioner shall directly or by contract
 implement the Program through a joint pharmaceuticals purchasing consortium. The joint
 pharmaceuticals purchasing consortium shall be offered on a voluntary basis no later
 than January 1, 2008, with mandatory participation by State or publicly funded, administered,
 or subsidized purchasers to the extent practicable and consistent with the purposes
 of this chapter, by January 1, 2010. If necessary, the Department of Vermont Health
 Access shall seek authorization from the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid to include
 purchases funded by Medicaid. “State or publicly funded purchasers” shall include
 the Department of Corrections, the Department of Mental Health, Medicaid, Dr. Dynasaur,
 VPharm, Healthy Vermonters, workers’ compensation, and any other State or publicly
 funded purchaser of prescription drugs.

 (2) The Commissioner of Vermont Health Access and the Secretary of Administration shall
 take all steps necessary to enable Vermont’s participation in joint prescription drug
 purchasing agreements with any other health benefit plan or organization within or
 outside this State that agrees to participate with Vermont in such joint purchasing
 agreements.

 (3) The Commissioner of Human Resources shall take all steps necessary to enable the State
 of Vermont to participate in joint prescription drug purchasing agreements with any
 other health benefit plan or organization within or outside this State that agrees
 to participate in such joint purchasing agreements, as may be agreed to through the
 bargaining process between the State of Vermont and the authorized representatives
 of the employees of the State of Vermont.

 (4) The actions of the Commissioners and the Secretary shall include:

 (A) active collaboration with the National Legislative Association on Prescription Drug
 Prices;

 (B) active collaboration with the Pharmacy RFP Issuing States initiative organized by
 the West Virginia Public Employees Insurance Agency;

 (C) the execution of any joint purchasing agreements or other contracts with any participating
 health benefit plan or organization within or outside the State that the Commissioner
 of Vermont Health Access determines will lower the cost of prescription drugs for
 Vermonters while maintaining high quality in prescription drug therapies; and

 (D) with regard to participation by the State Employees Health Benefit Plan, the execution
 of any joint purchasing agreements or other contracts with any health benefit plan
 or organization within or outside the State that the Commissioner of Vermont Health
 Access determines will lower the cost of prescription drugs and provide overall quality
 of integrated health care services to the State Employees Health Benefit Plan and
 the beneficiaries of the Plan, and that is negotiated through the bargaining process
 between the State of Vermont and the authorized representatives of the employees of
 the State of Vermont.

 (5) The Commissioners of Human Resources and of Vermont Health Access may renegotiate
 and amend existing contracts to which the Departments of Vermont Health Access and
 of Human Resources are parties if such renegotiation and amendment will be of economic
 benefit to the health benefit plans subject to such contracts, and to the beneficiaries
 of such plans. Any renegotiated or substituted contract shall be designed to improve
 the overall quality of integrated health care services provided to beneficiaries of
 such plans.

 (6) [Repealed.]

 (7) The Commissioner of Vermont Health Access, the Commissioner of Human Resources, the
 Commissioner of Financial Regulation, and the Secretary of Human Services shall establish
 a collaborative process with the Vermont Medical Society, pharmacists, health insurers,
 consumers, employer organizations and other health benefit plan sponsors, the National
 Legislative Association on Prescription Drug Prices, pharmaceutical manufacturer organizations,
 and other interested parties designed to consider and make recommendations to reduce
 the cost of prescription drugs for all Vermonters.

 (d) A participating health benefit plan other than a State public assistance program may
 agree with the Commissioner to limit the plan’s participation to one or more program
 components. The Commissioner shall supervise the implementation and operation of the
 Pharmacy Best Practices and Cost Control Program, including developing and maintaining
 the preferred drug list, to carry out the provisions of the subchapter. The Commissioner
 may include such insured or self-insured health benefit plans as agree to use the
 preferred drug list or otherwise participate in the provisions of this subchapter.
 The purpose of this subchapter is to reduce the cost of providing prescription drugs
 while maintaining high quality in prescription drug therapies.

 (e) The Commissioner of Vermont Health Access shall develop procedures for the coordination
 of State public assistance program health benefit plan benefits with pharmaceutical
 manufacturer patient assistance programs offering free or low cost prescription drugs,
 including the development of a proposed single application form for such programs.
 The Commissioner may contract with a nongovernmental organization to develop the single
 application form.

 (f)(1) The Drug Utilization Review Board shall make recommendations to the Commissioner for
 the adoption of the preferred drug list. The Board’s recommendations shall be based
 upon evidence-based considerations of clinical efficacy, adverse side effects, safety,
 appropriate clinical trials, and cost-effectiveness. “Evidence-based” shall have the
 same meaning as in 18 V.S.A. § 4621. The Commissioner shall provide the Board with evidence-based information about clinical
 efficacy, adverse side effects, safety, and appropriate clinical trials and shall
 provide information about cost-effectiveness of available drugs in the same therapeutic
 class.

 (2) The Board shall meet at least quarterly. The Board shall comply with the requirements
 of 1 V.S.A. chapter 5, subchapter 2 (Open Meeting Law) and 1 V.S.A. chapter 5, subchapter 3 (Public Records Act), except that the Board may go into executive session
 to discuss drug alternatives and receive information on the relative price, net of
 any rebates, of a drug under discussion and the drug price in comparison to the prices,
 net of any rebates, of alternative drugs available in the same class to determine
 cost-effectiveness, and in order to comply with subsection 2002(c) of this title to consider information relating to a pharmaceutical rebate or to supplemental rebate
 agreements, which are protected from disclosure by federal law or the terms and conditions
 required by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services as a condition of rebate
 authorization under the Medicaid program.

 (3) To the extent feasible, the Board shall review all drug classes included in the preferred
 drug list at least every 24 months and may recommend that the Commissioner make additions
 to or deletions from the preferred drug list.

 (4) The Program shall establish Board procedures for the timely review of prescription
 drugs newly approved by the federal Food and Drug Administration, including procedures
 for the review of newly approved prescription drugs in emergency circumstances.

 (5) Members of the Board shall receive per diem compensation and reimbursement of expenses
 in accordance with 32 V.S.A. § 1010.

 (6) The Commissioner shall encourage participation in the joint purchasing consortium
 by inviting representatives of the programs and entities specified in subdivision
 (c)(1) of this section to participate as observers or nonvoting members in the Drug
 Utilization Review Board and by inviting the representatives to use the preferred
 drug list in connection with the plans’ prescription drug coverage.

 (g) The Department shall seek assistance from entities conducting independent research
 into the effectiveness of prescription drugs to provide technical and clinical support
 in the development and the administration of the preferred drug list and the evidence-based
 education program established in 18 V.S.A. chapter 91, subchapter 2. (Added 2001, No. 127 (Adj. Sess.), § 1, eff. June 13, 2002; amended 2003, No. 122 (Adj. Sess.), § 128f; 2003, No. 156 (Adj. Sess.), § 15; 2005, No. 71, § 308; 2005, No. 174 (Adj. Sess.), § 101; 2007, No. 80, §§ 1a, 2; 2009, No. 59, § 9; 2009, No. 1 (Sp. Sess.), § E.309.2; 2009, No. 156 (Adj. Sess.), § I.62; 2011, No. 78 (Adj. Sess.), § 2, eff. April 2, 2012; 2011, No. 171 (Adj. Sess.), § 41c; 2013, No. 79, § 26, eff. Jan. 1, 2014; 2013, No. 131 (Adj. Sess.), § 45, eff. May 20, 2014; 2013, No. 142 (Adj. Sess.), § 98a; 2017, No. 85, § E.306.1.)

 § 1998a. Pharmacy mail order 

 The Pharmacy Best Practices and Cost Control Program shall require consumers to purchase
 prescription drugs using mail order for selected pharmacy products. (Added 2005, No. 71, § 307.)

 § 1999. Consumer protection rules; prior authorization 

 (a)(1) The Pharmacy Best Practices and Cost Control Program shall authorize pharmacy benefit
 coverage when a patient’s health care provider prescribes a prescription drug not
 on the preferred drug list, or a prescription drug that is not the list’s preferred
 choice, if any of the circumstances set forth in subdivision (2) or (3) of this subsection
 applies.

 (2)(A) The Program shall authorize coverage under the same terms as coverage for preferred
 choice drugs if the prescriber determines, after consultation with the pharmacist,
 or with the participating health benefit plan if required by the terms of the plan,
 that one or more of the following circumstances apply:

 (i) The preferred choice or choices have not been effective, or with reasonable certainty
 are not expected to be effective, in treating the patient’s condition.

 (ii) The preferred choice or choices cause or are reasonably expected to cause adverse
 or harmful reactions in the patient.

 (iii)(I) The patient is new to the Program and has been stabilized on a prescription drug that
 is not on the preferred drug list or is not one of the list’s preferred choices, or
 a current patient has been stabilized on a prescription drug that has been removed
 from preferred drug list or is no longer one of the list’s preferred choices, and
 it is clinically indicated that the patient should remain stabilized on the drug in
 order to avoid an adverse clinical impact or outcome.

 (II) The Drug Utilization Review Board and the Department of Vermont Health Access shall
 clinically evaluate newly introduced medications and therapeutic classes to determine
 their clinical appropriateness for continuation of coverage as set forth in subdivision
 (I) of this subdivision (iii).

 (B) The prescriber’s determination concerning whether the standards established in this
 subdivision (2) have been demonstrated shall be final if any documentation required
 at the direction of the Drug Utilization Review Board has been provided.

 (3) The Program shall authorize coverage if the patient agrees to pay any additional cost
 in excess of the benefits provided by the patient’s health benefit plan that is participating
 in the Program. The provisions of this subdivision (3) shall not apply to the extent
 that they may be inconsistent with any federal Medicaid laws and regulations. The
 provisions of this subdivision (3) shall not affect implementation by a participating
 health benefit plan of tiered copayments or other similar cost sharing systems.

 (b) The Program or any participating health benefit plan shall provide information on
 how prescribers, pharmacists, beneficiaries, and other interested parties can obtain
 a copy of the preferred drug list, whether any change has been made to the preferred
 drug list since it was last issued, and the process by which exceptions to the preferred
 list may be made.

 (c), (d) [Repealed.]

 (e)(1) The prior authorization process shall be designed to minimize administrative burdens
 on prescribers, pharmacists, and consumers. The provisions of this section shall apply
 to the Program’s prior authorization process.

 (2) The prior authorization process shall ensure real-time receipt of requests, by telephone,
 voicemail, facsimile, electronic transmission, or mail on a 24-hour basis, seven days
 a week.

 (3) The prior authorization process shall provide an in-person response to emergency requests
 by a prescriber with telephone answering queues that do not exceed 10 minutes.

 (4) Any request for authorization or approval of a drug that the prescriber indicates,
 including the clinical reasons for the request, is for an emergency or urgent condition
 shall be responded to in no more than four hours from the time the Program or participating
 health benefit plan receives the request.

 (5) In emergency circumstances, or if the response to a request for prior authorization
 is not provided within the time period established in subdivision (4) of this subsection,
 a 72-hour supply of the drug prescribed shall be deemed to be authorized by the Program
 or the participating health benefit plan, provided it is a prescription drug approved
 by the Food and Drug Administration, and provided, for drugs dispensed to a Medicaid
 beneficiary, it is subject to a rebate agreement with the Centers for Medicare and
 Medicaid Services.

 (6) The Program or participating plan shall provide to participating providers a prior
 authorization request form for each enrolled beneficiary, known to be a patient of
 the provider, designed to permit the prescriber to make prior authorization requests
 in advance of the need to fill the prescription, and designed to be completed without
 unnecessary delay. The form shall be capable of being stamped with information relating
 to the participating provider, and if feasible at least one form capable of being
 copied shall contain known patient information.

 (f) The Program’s prior authorization process shall require that the prescriber, not the
 pharmacy, request a prior authorization exemption to the requirements of this section.
 No later than December 31, 2004, the Commissioner shall create a pilot program designed
 to exempt a prescriber from the prior authorization requirement of the preferred drug
 list program if the Program determines that the prescriber has met compliance standards
 established by the Department in consultation with the Drug Utilization Review Board.
 This exemption does not apply to drugs that require prior authorization for clinical
 reasons. (Added 2001, No. 127 (Adj. Sess.), § 1, eff. June 13, 2002; amended 2003, No. 122 (Adj. Sess.), § 128k; 2005, No. 71, §§ 309, 310; 2011, No. 171 (Adj. Sess.), § 41c; 2013, No. 131 (Adj. Sess.), § 46, eff. May 20, 2014; 2019, No. 154 (Adj. Sess.), § E.307, eff. Oct. 2, 2020.)

 § 2000. Pharmacy benefit management 

 The Commissioner may implement all or a portion of the Pharmacy Best Practices and
 Cost Control Program through a contract with a third party with expertise in the management
 of pharmacy benefits. (Added 2001, No. 127 (Adj. Sess.), § 1, eff. June 13, 2002; amended 2005, No. 174 (Adj. Sess.), § 102; 2009, No. 156 (Adj. Sess.), § I.63.)

 § 2001. Legislative oversight 

 (a) Notwithstanding the provisions of 2 V.S.A. § 20(d), the Commissioner of Vermont Health Access shall report annually on or before October
 30 to the House Committees on Appropriations, on Health Care, and on Human Services
 and the Senate Committees on Appropriations and on Health and Welfare concerning the
 Pharmacy Best Practices and Cost Control Program and the operation of Vermont’s pharmaceutical
 assistance programs for the most recent State fiscal year. Topics covered in the report
 shall include:

 (1) issues related to drug cost and utilization;

 (2) the effect of national trends on the pharmacy programs;

 (3) comparisons to other states;

 (4) the Department’s administration of Vermont’s pharmaceutical assistance programs;

 (5) the Department’s use of prior authorization requirements for prescription drugs; and

 (6) decisions made by the Department’s Drug Utilization Review Board in relation to both
 drug utilization review efforts and the placement of drugs on the Department’s preferred
 drug list.

 (b)(1) The Commissioner shall not enter into a contract with a pharmacy benefit manager unless
 the pharmacy benefit manager has agreed to disclose to the Commissioner the terms
 and the financial impact on Vermont and on Vermont beneficiaries of:

 (A) any agreement with a pharmaceutical manufacturer to favor the manufacturer’s products
 over a competitor’s products, or to place the manufacturer’s drug on the pharmacy
 benefit manager’s preferred list or formulary, or to switch the drug prescribed by
 the patient’s health care provider with a drug agreed to by the pharmacy benefit manager
 and the manufacturer;

 (B) any agreement with a pharmaceutical manufacturer to share manufacturer rebates and
 discounts with the pharmacy benefit manager, or to pay “soft money” or other economic
 benefits to the pharmacy benefit manager;

 (C) any agreement or practice to bill Vermont health benefit plans for prescription drugs
 at a cost higher than the pharmacy benefit manager pays the pharmacy;

 (D) any agreement to share revenue with a mail order or internet pharmacy company;

 (E) any agreement to sell prescription drug data concerning Vermont beneficiaries or data
 concerning the prescribing practices of the health care providers of Vermont beneficiaries;
 or

 (F) any other agreement of the pharmacy benefit manager with a pharmaceutical manufacturer,
 or with wholesale and retail pharmacies, affecting the cost of pharmacy benefits provided
 to Vermont beneficiaries.

 (2) The Commissioner shall not enter into a contract with a pharmacy benefit manager who
 has entered into an agreement or engaged in a practice described in subdivision (1)
 of this subsection, unless the Commissioner determines that the agreement or practice
 furthers the financial interests of Vermont and does not adversely affect the medical
 interests of Vermont beneficiaries. (Added 2001, No. 127 (Adj. Sess.), § 1, eff. June 13, 2002; amended 2005, No. 174 (Adj. Sess.), § 103; 2009, No. 33, § 83; 2009, No. 156 (Adj. Sess.), § I.64; 2011, No. 171 (Adj. Sess.), § 41c; 2015, No. 23, § 57; 2015, No. 58, § E.307.1; 2015, No. 97 (Adj. Sess.), § 68; 2015, No. 172 (Adj. Sess.), § E.306.10; 2021, No. 130 (Adj. Sess.), § 2, eff. May 24, 2022.)

 § 2002. Supplemental rebates 

 (a) The Commissioner of Vermont Health Access, separately or in concert with the authorized
 representatives of any participating health benefit plan, shall use the preferred
 drug list authorized by the Pharmacy Best Practices and Cost Control Program to negotiate
 with pharmaceutical companies for the payment to the Commissioner of supplemental
 rebates or price discounts for Medicaid and for any other State public assistance
 health benefit plans designated by the Commissioner, in addition to those required
 by Title XIX of the Social Security Act. The Commissioner may also use the preferred
 drug list to negotiate for the payment of rebates or price discounts in connection
 with drugs covered under any other participating health benefit plan within or outside
 this State, provided that such negotiations and any subsequent agreement shall comply
 with the provisions of 42 U.S.C. § 1396r-8. The Program, or such portions of the Program as the Commissioner shall designate,
 shall constitute a State pharmaceutical assistance program under 42 U.S.C. § 1396r-8(c)(1)(C).

 (b) The Commissioner shall negotiate supplemental rebates, price discounts, and other
 mechanisms to reduce net prescription drug costs by means of any negotiation strategy
 that the Commissioner determines will result in the maximum economic benefit to the
 Program and to consumers in this State, while maintaining access to high-quality prescription
 drug therapies. The Commissioner may negotiate through a purchasing pool or directly
 with manufacturers. The provisions of this subsection do not authorize agreements
 with pharmaceutical manufacturers in which financial support for medical services
 covered by the Medicaid program is accepted as consideration for placement of one
 or more prescription drugs on the preferred drug list.

 (c) The Department of Vermont Health Access shall prohibit the public disclosure of information
 revealing company-identifiable trade secrets (including rebate and supplemental rebate
 amounts, and manufacturer’s pricing) obtained by the Department, and by any officer,
 employee, or contractor of the Department in the course of negotiations conducted
 pursuant to this section. Such confidential information shall be exempt from public
 disclosure under 1 V.S.A. chapter 5, subchapter 3 (Public Records Act). (Added 2001, No. 127 (Adj. Sess.), § 1, eff. June 13, 2002; amended 2005, No. 71, § 311; 2005, No. 174 (Adj. Sess.), § 104; 2009, No. 156 (Adj. Sess.), § I.65; 2021, No. 20, § 307.)

 § 2003. Pharmacy discount plans 

 (a) The Commissioner of Vermont Health Access shall implement pharmacy discount plans,
 to be known as the Healthy Vermonters Program, for Vermonters without adequate coverage
 for prescription drugs. The provisions of subchapter 8 of this chapter shall apply
 to the Commissioner’s authority to administer the pharmacy discount plans established
 by this section.

 (b) The Healthy Vermonters Program shall offer beneficiaries an initial discounted cost
 for covered drugs. Upon approval by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services
 of a Section 1115 Medicaid waiver program, and upon subsequent legislative approval,
 the Healthy Vermonters Program shall offer beneficiaries a secondary discounted cost,
 which shall reflect a State payment toward the cost of each dispensed drug as well
 as any rebate amount negotiated by the Commissioner.

 (c) As used in this section:

 (1) “Beneficiary” means any individual enrolled in the Healthy Vermonters Program.

 (2) “Healthy Vermonters beneficiary” means any individual Vermont resident without adequate
 coverage:

 (A) who is at least 65 years of age, or is disabled and is eligible for Medicare or Social
 Security disability benefits, with household income equal to or less than 400 percent
 of the federal poverty level, as calculated using modified adjusted gross income as
 defined in 26 U.S.C. § 36B(d)(2)(B); or

 (B) whose household income is equal to or less than 350 percent of the federal poverty
 level, as calculated using modified adjusted gross income as defined in 26 U.S.C. § 36B(d)(2)(B).

 (3) [Repealed.]

 (4) “Initial discounted cost” means the price of the drug based on the Medicaid fee schedule.

 (5) “Labeler” means an entity or person that receives prescription drugs from a manufacturer
 or wholesaler and repackages those drugs for later retail sale and that has a labeler
 code from the federal Food and Drug Administration under 21 C.F.R. § 207.20.

 (6) “Participating retail pharmacy” means a retail pharmacy located in this State or another
 business licensed to dispense prescription drugs in this State that participates in
 the Program according to rules established by the Department and provides discounted
 prices to eligible beneficiaries of the Program.

 (7) “Rebate amount” means the rebate negotiated by the Director and required from a drug
 manufacturer or labeler under this section. In determining the appropriate rebate,
 the Director shall:

 (A) take into consideration the rebate calculated under the Medicaid rebate program under
 42 U.S.C. § 1396r-8, the average wholesale price of prescription drugs, and any other information on
 prescription drug prices and price discounts;

 (B) use his or her best efforts to obtain an initial rebate amount equal to or greater
 than the rebate calculated under the Medicaid program under 42 U.S.C. § 1396r-8; and

 (C) use his or her best efforts to obtain an amount equal to or greater than the amount
 of any discount, rebate, or price reduction for prescription drugs provided to the
 federal government.

 (8) “Secondary discounted cost” means, under the Healthy Vermonters Program, the price
 of the drug based on the Medicaid fee schedule, less payment by the State of at least
 two percent of the Medicaid rate, less any rebate amount negotiated by the Director
 and paid for out of the Healthy Vermonters Dedicated Fund established under subsection
 (h) of this section and, under the Healthy Vermonters Plus Program, the average wholesale
 price of the drug, less payment by the State of at least two percent of the Medicaid
 rate, less any rebate amount negotiated by the Director and paid for out of the Healthy
 Vermonters Dedicated Fund established under subsection (h) of this section.

 (9) “Without adequate coverage” includes beneficiaries with no coverage for prescription
 drugs or certain types of prescription drugs and beneficiaries whose annual maximum
 coverage limit under their health benefit plan has been reached.

 (d) Drugs covered by the pharmacy discount plans shall include all drugs covered under
 the Medicaid program.

 (e) The Vermont Board of Pharmacy shall adopt standards of practice requiring disclosure
 by participating retail pharmacies to beneficiaries of the amount of savings provided
 as a result of the pharmacy discount plans. The standards must consider and protect
 information that is proprietary in nature. The Department of Vermont Health Access
 may not impose transaction charges under this Program on pharmacies that submit claims
 or receive payments under the plans. Pharmacies shall submit claims to the Department
 to verify the amount charged to beneficiaries under the plans. On a weekly or biweekly
 basis, the Department must reimburse pharmacies for the difference between the initial
 discounted price or the average wholesale price and the secondary discounted price
 provided to beneficiaries.

 (f) The names of drug manufacturers and labelers who do and do not enter into rebate agreements
 under pharmacy discount plans are public information. The Department of Vermont Health
 Access shall release this information to health care providers and the public on a
 regular basis and shall publicize participation by manufacturers and labelers. The
 Department shall impose prior authorization requirements in the Medicaid program,
 as permitted by law, to the extent the Department determines it is appropriate to
 do so in order to encourage manufacturer and labeler participation in the pharmacy
 discount plans and so long as the additional prior authorization requirements remain
 consistent with the goals of the Medicaid program and the requirements of Title XIX
 of the Social Security Act.

 (g) The Commissioner of Vermont Health Access shall establish, by rule, a process to resolve
 discrepancies in rebate amounts claimed by manufacturers, labelers, pharmacies, and
 the Department.

 (h) The Healthy Vermonters Dedicated Fund is established to receive revenue from manufacturers
 and labelers who pay rebates as provided in this section and any appropriations or
 allocations designated for the Fund. The purposes of the Fund are to reimburse retail
 pharmacies for discounted prices provided to individuals enrolled in the pharmacy
 discount plans and to reimburse the Department of Vermont Health Access for contracted
 services, including pharmacy claims processing fees, administrative and associated
 computer costs, and other reasonable program costs. The Fund is a nonlapsing dedicated
 fund. Interest on Fund balances accrues to the Fund. Surplus funds in the Fund must
 be used for the benefit of the Program.

 (i) [Repealed.]

 (j) The Department of Vermont Health Access shall undertake outreach efforts to build
 public awareness of the pharmacy discount plans and maximize enrollment. Outreach
 efforts shall include steps to educate retail pharmacists on the purposes of the Healthy
 Vermonters Dedicated Fund, in particular as it relates to pharmacy reimbursements
 for discounted prices provided to Program enrollees. The Department may adjust the
 requirements and terms of the pharmacy discount plans to accommodate any new federally
 funded prescription drug programs.

 (k) The Department of Vermont Health Access may contract with a third party or third parties
 to administer any or all components of the pharmacy discount plans, including outreach,
 eligibility, claims, administration, and rebate recovery and redistribution.

 (l) The Department of Vermont Health Access shall administer the pharmacy discount plans
 and other medical and pharmaceutical assistance programs under this title in a manner
 advantageous to the programs and enrollees. In implementing this section, the Department
 may coordinate the other programs and the pharmacy discount plans and may take actions
 to enhance efficiency, reduce the cost of prescription drugs, and maximize benefits
 to the programs and enrollees, including providing the benefits of pharmacy discount
 plans to enrollees in other programs.

 (m) The Department of Vermont Health Access may adopt rules to implement the provisions
 of this section.

 (n) The Department of Vermont Health Access shall seek a waiver from the Centers for Medicare
 and Medicaid Services (CMS) requesting authorization necessary to implement the provisions
 of this section, including application of manufacturer and labeler rebates to the
 pharmacy discount plans. The secondary discounted cost shall not be available to beneficiaries
 of the pharmacy discount plans until the Department receives written notification
 from CMS that the waiver requested under this section has been approved and until
 the General Assembly subsequently approves all aspects of the pharmacy discount plans,
 including funding for positions and related operating costs associated with eligibility
 determinations. (Added 2001, No. 127 (Adj. Sess.), § 1, eff. June 13, 2002; amended 2003, No. 122 (Adj. Sess.), § 128o; 2005, No. 174 (Adj. Sess.), § 105; 2007, No. 80, § 7; 2009, No. 156 (Adj. Sess.), § I.66; 2011, No. 171 (Adj. Sess.), § 41c; 2013, No. 79, § 31, eff. Jan. 1, 2014; 2013, No. 131 (Adj. Sess.), § 47, eff. May 20, 2014; 2013, No. 142 (Adj. Sess.), § 99.)

 § 2004. Manufacturer fee 

 (a) Annually, each pharmaceutical manufacturer or labeler of prescription drugs that are
 paid for by the Department of Vermont Health Access for individuals participating
 in Medicaid, Dr. Dynasaur, or VPharm shall pay a fee to the Agency of Human Services.
 The fee shall be 1.75 percent of the previous calendar year’s prescription drug spending
 by the Department and shall be assessed based on manufacturer labeler codes as used
 in the Medicaid rebate program.

 (b) Fees collected under this section shall fund collection and analysis of information
 on pharmaceutical marketing activities under 18 V.S.A. §§ 4632 and 4633; analysis of prescription drug data needed by the Office of the Attorney General
 for enforcement activities; the Vermont Prescription Monitoring System established
 in 18 V.S.A. chapter 84A; the evidence-based education program established in 18 V.S.A. chapter 91, subchapter 2; the Green Mountain Care Board’s prescription drug cost regulation
 initiatives; statewide unused prescription drug disposal initiatives; prevention of
 prescription drug misuse, abuse, and diversion; the Substance Misuse Prevention Oversight
 and Advisory Council established in 18 V.S.A. § 4803; treatment of substance use disorder; exploration of nonpharmacological approaches
 to pain management; a hospital antimicrobial program for the purpose of reducing hospital-acquired
 infections; the purchase and distribution of fentanyl testing strips; the purchase
 and distribution of naloxone to emergency medical services personnel; and any opioid-antagonist
 education, training, and distribution program operated by the Department of Health
 or its agents. The fees shall be collected in the Evidence-Based Education and Advertising
 Fund established in section 2004a of this title.

 (c) The Secretary of Human Services or designee shall adopt rules for the implementation
 of this section.

 (d) The Department shall maintain on its website a list of the manufacturers who have
 failed to provide timely payment as required under this section. (Added 2007, No. 80, § 20; amended 2007, No. 89 (Adj. Sess.), § 4; 2009, No. 156 (Adj. Sess.), § I.67; 2011, No. 162 (Adj. Sess.), § E.311; 2013, No. 50, § E.312.1; 2013, No. 79, § 27, eff. Jan. 1, 2014; 2013, No. 95 (Adj. Sess.), § 84, eff. Feb. 25, 2014; 2015, No. 173 (Adj. Sess.), § 12, eff. Jan. 1, 2016; 2019, No. 70, § 29; 2019, No. 72, § E.313; 2023, No. 134 (Adj. Sess.), § 2, eff. July 1, 2024.)

 § 2004a. Evidence-Based Education and Advertising Fund 

 (a) The Evidence-Based Education and Advertising Fund is established in the State Treasury
 as a special fund to be a source of financing for activities relating to fund collection
 and analysis of information on pharmaceutical marketing activities under 18 V.S.A. §§ 4632 and 4633; for analysis of prescription drug data needed by the Office of the Attorney General
 for enforcement activities; for the Vermont Prescription Monitoring System established
 in 18 V.S.A. chapter 84A; for the evidence-based education program established in 18 V.S.A. chapter 91, subchapter 2; for the Green Mountain Care Board’s prescription drug cost regulation
 initiatives; for statewide unused prescription drug disposal initiatives; for the
 prevention of prescription drug misuse, abuse, and diversion; for the Substance Misuse
 Prevention Oversight and Advisory Council established in 18 V.S.A. § 4803; for treatment of substance use disorder; for exploration of nonpharmacological approaches
 to pain management; for a hospital antimicrobial program for the purpose of reducing
 hospital-acquired infections; for the purchase and distribution of fentanyl testing
 strips; for the purchase and distribution of naloxone to emergency medical services
 personnel; and for the support of any opioid-antagonist education, training, and distribution
 program operated by the Department of Health or its agents. Monies deposited into
 the Fund shall be used for the purposes described in this section.

 (b) Into the Fund shall be deposited:

 (1) revenue from the manufacturer fee established under section 2004 of this title; and

 (2) the proceeds from grants, donations, contributions, taxes, and any other sources of
 revenue as may be provided by statute, rule, or act of the General Assembly.

 (c) The Fund shall be administered pursuant to 32 V.S.A. chapter 7, subchapter 5, except that interest earned on the Fund and any remaining balance
 shall be retained in the Fund. (Added 2007, No. 80, § 20a; amended 2011, No. 162 (Adj. Sess.), § E.311.1, eff. May 17, 2012; 2013, No. 50, § E.312.2; 2013, No. 95 (Adj. Sess.), § 85, eff. Feb. 25, 2014; 2015, No. 173 (Adj. Sess.), § 13; 2019, No. 72, § E.313.1; 2023, No. 134 (Adj. Sess.), § 3, eff. July 1, 2024.)

 §§ 2005, 2006. Recodified. 2007, No. 80, § 23. [Repealed] 

 § 2007. Canadian Prescription Drug Information Program 

 The Department of Vermont Health Access shall establish a website and prepare written
 information to offer guidance to Vermont residents seeking information about ordering
 prescription drugs through the mail or otherwise from a participating Canadian pharmacy. (Added 2003, No. 122 (Adj. Sess.), § 128m; amended 2005, No. 174 (Adj. Sess.), § 106; 2009, No. 156 (Adj. Sess.), § I.68.)

 § 2008. Recodified. 2007, No. 80, § 23. 

 § 2009. Repealed. 2007, No. 80, § 24. 

 § 2010. Repealed. 2017, No. 210 (Adj. Sess.). § 15, effective June 1, 2018. 

 Subchapter 006 : CLINICAL UTILIZATION REVIEW BOARD 

 § 2031. Creation of Clinical Utilization Review Board 

 (a) No later than June 15, 2010, the Department of Vermont Health Access shall create
 a Clinical Utilization Review Board to examine existing medical services, emerging
 technologies, and relevant evidence-based clinical practice guidelines and make recommendations
 to the Department regarding coverage, unit limitations, place of service, and appropriate
 medical necessity of services in the State’s Medicaid programs.

 (b) The Board shall comprise 10 members with diverse medical experience, to be appointed
 by the Governor upon recommendation of the Commissioner of Vermont Health Access.
 The Board shall solicit additional input as needed from individuals with expertise
 in areas of relevance to the Board’s deliberations. The Medical Director of the Department
 of Vermont Health Access shall serve as the State’s liaison to the Board. Board member
 terms shall be staggered, but in no event longer than three years from the date of
 appointment. The Board shall meet at least quarterly, provided that the Board shall
 meet no less frequently than once per month for the first six months following its
 formation.

 (c) The Board shall have the following duties and responsibilities:

 (1) Identify and recommend to the Commissioner of Vermont Health Access opportunities
 to improve quality, efficiencies, and adherence to relevant evidence-based clinical
 practice guidelines in the Department’s medical programs by:

 (A) examining high-cost and high-use services identified through the programs’ current
 medical claims data;

 (B) reviewing existing utilization controls to identify areas in which improved utilization
 review might be indicated, including use of elective, nonemergency, out-of-state outpatient
 and hospital services;

 (C) reviewing medical literature on current best practices and areas in which services
 lack sufficient evidence to support their effectiveness;

 (D) conferring with commissioners, directors, and councils within the Agency of Human
 Services and the Department of Financial Regulation, as appropriate, to identify specific
 opportunities for exploration and to solicit recommendations;

 (E) identifying appropriate but underutilized services and recommending new services for
 addition to Medicaid coverage;

 (F) determining whether it would be clinically and fiscally appropriate for the Department
 of Vermont Health Access to contract with facilities that specialize in certain treatments
 and have been recognized by the medical community as having good clinical outcomes
 and low morbidity and mortality rates, such as transplant centers and pediatric oncology
 centers; and

 (G) considering the possible administrative burdens or benefits of potential recommendations
 on providers, including examining the feasibility of exempting from prior authorization
 requirements those health care professionals whose prior authorization requests are
 routinely granted.

 (2) Recommend to the Commissioner of Vermont Health Access the most appropriate mechanisms
 to implement the recommended evidence-based clinical practice guidelines. Such mechanisms
 may include prior authorization, prepayment, postservice claim review, and frequency
 limits. Recommendations shall be consistent with the Department’s existing utilization
 processes, including those related to transparency, timeliness, and reporting. Prior
 to submitting final recommendations to the Commissioner of Vermont Health Access,
 the Board shall ensure time for public comment is available during the Board’s meeting
 and identify other methods for soliciting public input.

 (d) The Commissioner may adopt a mechanism recommended pursuant to subdivision (c)(2)
 of this section with or without amendment, provided that if the Commissioner proposes
 to amend the mechanism recommended by the Board, he or she shall request the Board
 to consider the amendment before the mechanism is implemented or is filed as a proposed
 administrative rule pursuant to 3 V.S.A. § 838. (Added 2009, No. 146 (Adj. Sess.), § C34; amended No. 156, § F.7; 2011, No. 78 (Adj. Sess.), § 2, eff. April 2, 2012.)

 § 2032. Role of Department of Vermont Health Access 

 (a) The Department of Vermont Health Access shall provide the Clinical Utilization Review
 Board with data support to enable the Board to conduct reviews.

 (b) The Department’s Program Integrity Unit shall inform the Board of practices the Unit
 has identified through its reviews in order to avoid duplication of efforts.

 (c) The Department shall provide members of the Board with per diem compensation.

 (d) The Department shall have the final authority to evaluate and implement the Board’s
 recommendations.

 (e) The Department shall conduct comprehensive evaluations of the Board’s success in improving
 clinical and utilization results using claims data and a survey of health care professional
 satisfaction. The Department shall report annually by January 15 to the House Committee
 on Health Care and the Senate Committee on Health and Welfare regarding the results
 of the most recent evaluation or evaluations and a summary of the Board’s activities
 and recommendations since the last report. The provisions of 2 V.S.A. § 20(d) (expiration of required reports) shall not apply to the report to be made under this
 subsection.

 (f) The Department shall adopt rules pursuant to 3 V.S.A. chapter 25 as needed to implement
 specific recommendations. (Added 2009, No. 146 (Adj. Sess.), § C34; amended 2013, No. 142 (Adj. Sess.), § 70; 2015, No. 11, § 36.)

 Subchapter 008 : VERMONT PHARMACEUTICAL ASSISTANCE PROGRAMS 

 § 2071. Definitions 

 As used in this subchapter:

 (1) “Individual with disabilities” means an individual who is under age 65 and is entitled,
 under the Social Security Act, to disability insurance benefits or is eligible for
 Medicare.

 (2) “Maintenance drug” means a drug approved by the federal Food and Drug Administration
 for continuous use and prescribed to treat a chronic condition for a prolonged period
 of time of 30 days or longer and includes insulin, an insulin syringe, and an insulin
 needle.

 (3) “Medicare Part D” means the prescription drug program established under the Medicare
 Prescription Drug, Improvement and Modernization Act of 2003, Pub. L. No. 108-173,
 including the prescription drug plans offered pursuant to the act.

 (4) “DVHA” means the Department of Vermont Health Access.

 (5) “Pharmaceutical” means a drug that may not be dispensed unless prescribed by a health
 care provider as defined by 18 V.S.A. § 9402(7) acting within the scope of the provider’s license. The term excludes a drug determined
 less than effective under the federal Food, Drug and Cosmetics Act.

 (6) “Pharmacy” means a retail or institutional drug outlet licensed by the Vermont State
 Board of Pharmacy pursuant to 26 V.S.A. chapter 36, or by an equivalent board in another
 state, in which pharmaceuticals are sold at retail and that has entered into a written
 agreement with the State to dispense pharmaceuticals in accordance with the provisions
 of this chapter. (Added 2005, No. 71, § 314; amended 2009, No. 156 (Adj. Sess.), § I.70; 2013, No. 131 (Adj. Sess.), § 48, eff. May 20, 2014.)

 § 2072. General eligibility 

 (a) An individual shall be eligible for assistance under this subchapter if the individual:

 (1) is a resident of Vermont at the time of application for benefits;

 (2) is at least 65 years of age or is an individual with disabilities as defined in subdivision 2071(1) of this title; and

 (3) has a household income, when calculated using modified adjusted gross income as defined
 in 26 U.S.C. § 36B(d)(2)(B), no greater than 225 percent of the federal poverty level.

 (b) An individual whose pharmaceutical expenses are paid or reimbursable, either in whole
 or in part, by any plan of assistance or insurance, other than Title XVIII (Medicare)
 and Title XIX (Medicaid) of the Social Security Act, shall not be eligible for pharmaceutical
 assistance under this subchapter. No assistance shall be provided under this subchapter
 with respect to an individual pharmaceutical purchase that may be covered in whole
 by Title XVIII.

 (c) If an individual becomes ineligible for assistance under this subchapter, the Secretary
 shall terminate assistance to the individual. (Added 2005, No. 71, § 314; amended 2009, No. 1 (Sp. Sess.), § E.309; 2013, No. 79, § 32, eff. Jan. 1, 2014.)

 § 2073. VPharm assistance program 

 [Subsection (a) contingently effective until the later of January 1, 2022 or federal
 approval of VPharm coverage expansion; see also subsection (a) contingently effective
 on the later of January 1, 2022 or federal approval of VPharm coverage expansion set
 out below.]

 (a) Effective January 1, 2006, the VPharm program is established as a State pharmaceutical
 assistance program to provide supplemental pharmaceutical coverage to Medicare beneficiaries.
 The supplemental coverage under subsection (c) of this section shall provide only
 the same pharmaceutical coverage as the Medicaid program to enrolled individuals whose
 income is not greater than 150 percent of the federal poverty guidelines and only
 coverage for maintenance drugs for enrolled individuals whose income is greater than
 150 percent and no greater than 225 percent of the federal poverty guidelines.

 [Subsection (a) contingently effective January 1, 2022 or federal approval of VPharm
 coverage expansion; see also subsection (a) contingently effective until the later
 of January 1, 2022 or federal approval of VPharm coverage expansion set out above.]

 (a) The VPharm program is established as a State pharmaceutical assistance program to
 provide supplemental pharmaceutical coverage to Medicare beneficiaries. The supplemental
 coverage under subsection (c) of this section shall provide the same pharmaceutical
 coverage as the Medicaid program to enrolled individuals whose income is not greater
 than 225 percent of the federal poverty guidelines.

 [Subsection (b) contingently effective until the later of January 1, 2022 or federal
 approval of VPharm coverage expansion; see also subsection (b) contingently effective
 on the later of January 1, 2022 or federal approval of VPharm coverage expansion set
 out below.]

 (b) Any individual with income no greater than 225 percent of the federal poverty guidelines
 participating in Medicare Part D, having secured the low income subsidy if the individual
 is eligible and meeting the general eligibility requirements established in section 2072 of this title, shall be eligible for VPharm.

 [Subsection (b) contingently effective on the later of January 1, 2022 or federal approval
 of VPharm coverage expansion; see also subsection (b) contingently effective until
 the later of January 1, 2022 or federal approval of VPharm coverage expansion set
 out above.]

 (b) Any individual with income not greater than 225 percent of the federal poverty guidelines
 participating in Medicare Part D, having secured the low-income subsidy if the individual
 is eligible and meeting the general eligibility requirements established in section 2072 of this title, shall be eligible for VPharm.

 (c) VPharm shall provide supplemental benefits by paying or subsidizing:

 (1) The actual Medicare Part D premium for the standard prescription drug benefit offered
 by Medicare Part D prescription drug programs, except for any late enrollment penalties,
 provided that DVHA may pay or subsidize a higher premium for a Medicare Part D prescription
 drug plan offering expanded benefits if it is cost-effective to do so.

 (2) Any other cost-sharing required by Medicare Part D, except for co-payments for individuals
 eligible for Medicaid and as provided for in subdivision (d)(1) of this section.

 (3) The following pharmaceuticals if they are not covered by the individual’s Medicare
 Part D prescription drug plan: pharmaceuticals or classes of pharmaceuticals, or their
 medical uses, which may be excluded from coverage or otherwise restricted under Medicaid
 under Section 1927(d)(2) or (3) of the Social Security Act.

 (4) Pharmaceuticals that are not covered after the individual has exhausted the Medicare
 Part D prescription drug plan’s appeal process or the prescription drug plan’s transition
 plan approved by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, and that are deemed
 medically necessary by the individual’s prescriber in a manner established by the
 Commissioner of Vermont Health Access. The coverage decision under this subdivision
 shall not be subject to the exceptions process established under Medicaid. An individual
 may appeal to the Human Services Board or pursue any other remedies provided by law.

 (d)(1) An individual shall contribute a co-payment of $1.00 for prescriptions where the cost-sharing
 amount required by Medicare Part D is less than $30.00, and a co-payment of $2.00
 for prescriptions where the cost-sharing amount required by Medicare Part D is $30.00
 or more. A pharmacy may not refuse to dispense a prescription to an individual who
 does not provide the co-payment.

 (2) An individual shall contribute the following base cost-sharing amounts that shall
 be indexed to the increases established under 42 C.F.R. § 423.104(d)(5)(iv) and then rounded to the nearest dollar amount:

 (A) in the case of recipients whose household income is no greater than 150 percent of
 the federal poverty level, such premium shall be $15.00 per month;

 (B) in the case of recipients whose household income is greater than 150 percent of the
 federal poverty level and no greater than 175 percent of the federal poverty level,
 the premium shall be $20.00 per month; and

 (C) in the case of recipients whose household income is greater than 175 percent of the
 federal poverty level and no greater than 225 percent of the federal poverty level,
 the premium shall be $50.00 per month.

 (e) In order to ensure the appropriate payment of claims, DVHA may expand the Medicare
 advocacy program established under chapter 67 of this title to individuals receiving
 benefits from the VPharm program.

 (f) A manufacturer of pharmaceuticals purchased by individuals receiving assistance from
 VPharm established under this section shall pay to DVHA, as required by section 1901 of this title, a rebate on all pharmaceutical claims for which State-only funds are expended in
 an amount that is in proportion to the State share of the total cost of the claim,
 as calculated annually on an aggregate basis, and based on the full Medicaid rebate
 amount as provided for in Section 1927(a) through (c) of the federal Social Security
 Act, 42 U.S.C. § 1396r-8. (Added 2005, No. 71, § 314; amended 2007, No. 172 (Adj. Sess.), § 11a; 2007, No. 192 (Adj. Sess.), § 6.017; 2009, No. 1 (Sp. Sess.), §§ E.309.6, E.309.7; 2009, No. 156 (Adj. Sess.), § E.309.16, eff. June 3, 2010; 2009, No. 156 (Adj. Sess.), §§ E.309.9, I.71; 2011, No. 162 (Adj. Sess.), §§ E.307, E.307.7; 2019, No. 140 (Adj. Sess.), § 6.)

 § 2074. Repealed. 2013, No. 79, § 52(d), effective January 1, 2014. 

 § 2075. Assistance in enrolling in Medicare Part D 

 The Agency of Human Services may act, if permissible under federal law, as an individual’s
 agent to enroll the individual in a Medicare Part D prescription drug plan and a low-income
 subsidy if the individual has not enrolled prior to the application for VPharm. The
 Agency shall provide applicants for VPharm with information on Medicare Part D and
 the low-income subsidy if applicable, and on how to obtain assistance in enrolling
 in Medicare Part D or the subsidy. (Added 2005, No. 71, § 314.)

 § 2076. Over-the-counter and generic medications 

 (a) All public pharmaceutical assistance programs shall provide coverage for those over-the-counter
 pharmaceuticals on the preferred drug list developed under section 1998 of this title, provided the pharmaceuticals are authorized as part of the medical treatment of
 a specific disease or condition, and they are a less costly, medically appropriate
 substitute for currently covered pharmaceuticals.

 (b) All public pharmaceutical assistance programs shall comply with the provisions regarding
 generic drugs established in 18 V.S.A. chapter 91.

 (c) DVHA shall seek any waivers of federal law, rule, or regulation necessary to implement
 the provisions of this section. (Added 2005, No. 71, § 314; amended 2009, No. 156 (Adj. Sess.), § I.73.)

 § 2077. Administration 

 (a) The programs established under this subchapter shall be designed to provide maximum
 access to program participants, to incorporate mechanisms that are easily understood
 and require minimum effort for applicants and health care providers, and to promote
 quality, efficiency, and effectiveness through cost controls and utilization review.
 Applications may be filed at any time and shall be reviewed annually. DVHA may contract
 with a fiscal agent for the purpose of processing claims and performing related functions
 required in the administration of the pharmaceutical programs established under this
 subchapter.

 (b) Upon determining that an applicant is eligible under this subchapter, DVHA shall issue
 an identification card to the applicant.

 (c) A pharmacy that dispenses a pharmaceutical to an individual eligible for a pharmaceutical
 program established under this subchapter shall collect payment for the pharmaceutical
 from DVHA. (Added 2005, No. 71, § 314; amended 2009, No. 1 (Sp. Sess.), § E.309.1; 2009, No. 156 (Adj. Sess.), § I.74.)

 § 2078. Education and outreach 

 The Department of Disabilities, Aging, and Independent Living shall conduct ongoing
 education and outreach to inform Vermonters who are elders and Vermonters with disabilities
 of the benefits they may be entitled to pursuant to this subchapter, make available
 information concerning pharmaceutical assistance programs, and minimize any confusion
 and duplication of pharmaceutical coverage resulting from a multiplicity of pharmaceutical
 programs. (Added 2005, No. 71, § 314; amended 2013, No. 96 (Adj. Sess.), § 211.)

 § 2079. Construction 

 The benefits provided by the pharmaceutical assistance programs established under
 this subchapter constitute medical services for purposes of section 141 of this title. (Added 2005, No. 71, § 314.)

 § 2080. Vermont Prescription Drug Pricing and Consumer Protection Program 

 The Secretary of Human Services shall administer this subchapter in conformity with
 the Pharmacy Best Practices and Cost Control Program established under subchapter
 5 of this chapter to enable the citizens of Vermont to purchase necessary prescription
 pharmaceuticals at the lowest possible price, to ensure access to such pharmaceuticals,
 and to support Vermont pharmacies, consistent with the time frames, standards, and
 procedures established by the General Assembly. (Added 2005, No. 71, § 314.)

 § 2081. Rulemaking 

 The Agency of Human Services shall adopt rules necessary to implement and administer
 the provisions of this subchapter, including standards and schedules establishing
 coverage and exclusion of pharmaceuticals and maximum quantities of pharmaceuticals
 to be dispensed, and to comply with the requirements of the Medicare Modernization
 Act. (Added 2005, No. 71, § 314; amended 2009, No. 156 (Adj. Sess.), § I.75; 2011, No. 171 (Adj. Sess.), § 41c; 2021, No. 130 (Adj. Sess.), § 3, eff. May 24, 2022.)

 Subchapter 009 : COVERAGE FOR ADDITIONAL POPULATIONS 

 § 2091. Dr. Dynasaur-like coverage; legislative intent 

 In establishing Dr. Dynasaur-like coverage for children and pregnant individuals who
 are not eligible for the Dr. Dynasaur program because of their immigration status,
 it is the intent of the General Assembly that the hospital, medical, dental, and prescription
 drug benefits and eligibility criteria for the coverage set forth in section 2092
 of this chapter should align to the greatest extent practicable with the benefits
 and eligibility criteria of the Dr. Dynasaur program. (Added 2021, No. 48, § 1, eff. June 1, 2021.)

 § 2092. Dr. Dynasaur-like coverage for certain Vermont residents 

 (a) As used in this section, the term “Vermont residents who have an immigration status
 for which Medicaid coverage is not available” includes migrant workers who are employed
 in seasonal occupations in this State.

 (b) The Agency of Human Services shall provide hospital, medical, dental, and prescription
 drug coverage equivalent to coverage in the Vermont Medicaid State Plan to the following
 categories of Vermont residents who have an immigration status for which Medicaid
 coverage is not available and who are otherwise uninsured:

 (1) children under 19 years of age whose household income does not exceed the income threshold
 for eligibility under the Vermont Medicaid State Plan; and

 (2) pregnant individuals whose household income does not exceed the income threshold for
 eligibility under the Vermont Medicaid State Plan for coverage during their pregnancy
 and for postpartum coverage equivalent to that available under the Vermont Medicaid
 State Plan.

 (c) The confidentiality provisions set forth in section 1902a of this chapter shall apply
 to all applications submitted and records created pursuant to this section, except
 that the Agency of Human Services shall not make any information regarding applicants
 or enrollees available to the United States government.

 (d) The Agency of Human Services may adopt rules in accordance with 3 V.S.A. chapter 25
 to carry out the purposes of this section. (Added 2021, No. 48, § 1, eff. June 1, 2021.)

 Statutes

 Vermont Statutes Online 

 Statutes Search 

 Vermont Statutes at Lexis/Nexis 

 Constitution

 Constitution of the State of Vermont 

 Acts

 Acts & Resolves 

 Acts Affecting VSA Sections 

 Rules

 State Agency Rules at Lexis/Nexis 

 Court Rules at Lexis/Nexis 

 Legislative Committee on Administrative Rules (LCAR) 

 Contact

 Vermont State House 
115 State Street 
Montpelier, VT 05633-5301 
(802) 828-2228 
 sgtatarms@leg.state.vt.us 

Capitol Police Department 
802-828-2273

 Member & Staff Links

 Legislative Email Sign-on 

 Legislative Human Resources 

 Legislative Time Reporting 

 Legislative Expense Reporting 

 Test My MFA 

 How to Use This Website 

 Disclaimer 

 State Government

 State of Vermont 

 Governor 

 Lieutenant Governor 

 Attorney General 

 Auditor 

 Secretary of State 

 Treasurer 

 Judiciary 

 State Agencies A-Z 

 State Telephone Directory 

 Noteworthy

 Announcements 

 Scheduled Committee Meetings 

 Legislative Schedule 

 Site Resources

 Sitemap | 

 Disclaimers 

 Questions & Comments | 

 Career Opportunities 

 Requests for Proposals | 

 Accessibility 

 Comments or questions about the website? Fill out our feedback form and let us know.

 Developers 

 Copyright 2026 State of Vermont. All rights reserved.

 Website Design & Development by Bluehouse Group
