Source URL: https://www.dhs.wisconsin.gov/publications/p1/p13032.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-09-23

        Wisconsin
     Estate Recovery
   Program Handbook




Wisconsin Department of Health Services
Division of Medicaid Services
P-13032 (11/2024)
You are getting this handbook because you are a Medicaid or
BadgerCare Plus member who may get services that are
subject to estate recovery. This includes members who are:
   • Enrolled in long-term care services and living in an
       institution.
   • Enrolled in a full-benefit Medicaid plan and age 55 or
       older.




This Wisconsin Estate Recovery Program Handbook may
change without notice.




Questions?
Call Member Services at 800-362-3002, 711, or 800-947-3529
(TTY) for translation or help understanding this handbook.
Spanish - Si necesita ayuda para traducir o entender este
          texto, por favor llame al teléfono 800-362-3002,
          711 o 800-947-3529 (TTY)
Russian - Если вам невсё понятно вэтом документе,
          позвоните по телефону 800-362-3002, 711 или
          800-947-3529 (TTY)
Hmong - Yog xav tau kev pab txhais cov ntaub ntawv no kom
          Koj totaub, hu rau 800-362-3002, 711 los sis
          800-947-3529 (TTY)
Table of Contents
Estate Recovery Program................................................ 1
   Introduction ..................................................................... 1
   What is the Estate Recovery Program? ........................... 1
   Which members and programs are affected by the
   Estate Recovery Program? .............................................. 2
   Which members are not subject to the Estate
   Recovery Program? ......................................................... 5
   How does DHS recover the cost of benefits? .................. 6
   When does DHS not recover benefits? ........................... 7
Probate Estates ............................................................ 10
   How does DHS recover the cost of benefits through
   estates?.......................................................................... 10
   When can DHS file a claim in an estate, and what
   constitutes the claim amount?...................................... 11
   How and when will a claim in an estate be paid? ......... 12
   Are the heirs allowed to keep anything from the
   member’s estate? .......................................................... 13
   Are there situations when DHS’s estate claim will not
   be paid or payment will be delayed? ............................ 13
   How does DHS file a claim in a probate proceeding in
   a court? .......................................................................... 15
Recovery of Non-Probate Assets after the Member’s
Death ........................................................................... 16
Marital Property........................................................... 18
Recovery by Affidavit of the Administrator ................... 18
   When can and can’t DHS recover the cost of benefits
   by use of an affidavit of the administrator? .................. 18
   How does DHS recover benefits by use of an affidavit
   of the administrator? .................................................... 19
Waiver of Claims Due to Hardship ................................ 21
   Are there any exemptions if recovery would cause a
   hardship to an heir or beneficiary? ............................... 21
Liens for Medicaid Hospital and Nursing Home
Residents (TEFRA Liens) ................................................ 22
   What is a lien and what effect does it have? ................ 22
   When can DHS file a lien on a home? ........................... 23
   When will payment of a lien be made?......................... 24
   What constitutes the amount paid by a lien? ............... 25
Glossary of Terms ......................................................... 26
For Further Information................................................ 33
Estate Recovery Program

Introduction
This handbook provides information about the Wisconsin Estate
Recovery Program. It includes who and what programs are
affected, how the recovery from an estate is made to collect
repayment for certain services, and situations where repayment
may not be recovered from an estate.

Members enrolled in Wisconsin Medicaid, BadgerCare Plus, the
Wisconsin Chronic Disease Program (WCDP), the Community
Options Program (COP), or non-Medicaid Family Care may be
affected by the Estate Recovery Program.

Some of the terms used here have been defined in the glossary at
the back of this handbook. If you need help to understand any of
this information, call Member Services at 800-362-3002.

What is the Estate Recovery Program?
The Wisconsin Estate Recovery Program seeks repayment for the
cost of certain long-term care services paid for on behalf of
members by Medicaid, BadgerCare Plus, COP, or non-Medicaid
Family Care or any services provided by WCDP. Recovery is made
from the estates of members, from the estates of their surviving
spouses, from certain non-probate property, and from liens filed
on their homes (Social Security Act, Title XIX, Sec. 1917, §§
49.496, 49.682, and 49.849). Recovery is made after the assets of

                                1
the member have been accounted for and higher priority
expenses have been paid as described in state law (Wis. Stat.
§ 859.25).

The money recovered is returned to the programs and used to
pay for care for other members. Long-term care services for which
the program seeks repayment include, but are not limited to,
nursing home services and home care services. These services are
listed in detail below.

Note: Members who are aged 55 or older, living in the
community, and not getting services related to long-term care or
any services through WCDP, are not subject to estate recovery.

Wisconsin is required by state and federal laws to recover the
costs of certain benefits paid for on behalf of health care
members. These laws are designed to recover assets from those
who got benefits.

Which members and programs are affected by the
Estate Recovery Program?
   Medicaid and BadgerCare Plus members:
    •   Of any age who live in nursing homes may have the cost
        recovered for all benefits that were paid by Medicaid or
        BadgerCare Plus while they lived in a nursing home. In
        addition to recovery from estates and from non-probate
        property, recovery is also made by filing liens against


                                 2
    homes of Medicaid or BadgerCare Plus members. For
    more information on liens, see the Liens for Medicaid
    Hospital and Nursing Home Residents (TEFRA Liens)
    section on page 22.
•   Of any age who got inpatient hospital benefits and who
    are considered institutionalized members may have the
    cost recovered for all benefits paid by Medicaid or
    BadgerCare Plus programs that were received during such
    stays. Institutionalized members are members who have
    been, or are expected to be, inpatients in a hospital for 30
    or more days and who are required to pay their monthly
    income toward their cost of care. In addition to recovery
    from estates and from non-probate property, recovery is
    also made by filing liens against homes of Medicaid or
    BadgerCare Plus members. For more information on liens,
    see the Liens for Medicaid Hospital and Nursing Home
    Residents (TEFRA Liens) section on page 22.
•   Age 55 or older may have the cost recovered for certain
    benefits received while they lived in the community,
    including:
    o Skilled nursing services
    o Home health aide services
    o Home health therapy and speech pathology services
    o Private duty nursing services
    o Personal care services




                              3
   •   Age 55 or older who reside in the community may have
       the cost recovered for all benefits they got while
       participating in the following long-term care programs:
       o COP Waiver
       o Community Integration Programs IA, IB, and II
       o Brain Injury Waiver
       o Community Supported Living Arrangements
       o Community Recovery Services
       o Family Care
       o Family Care Partnership
       o Include, Respect, I Self-Direct (IRIS)
       o Program of All-Inclusive Care for the Elderly (PACE)


       For members getting long-term care program services
       through a managed care organization (MCO), the monthly
       capitation payment made to the MCO will be recovered.
       The capitation payment is the amount the state pays to
       the MCO each month, and this amount is what the state
       recovers from the member.

 WCDP members of any age may have the cost of all benefits
  paid by WCDP recovered.
 COP participants who are aged 55 and older may have the
  cost of benefits paid by COP recovered.




                                 4
 Non-Medicaid Family Care members may have the actual cost
  of services as reported to the Department of Health Services
  (DHS) recovered for any enrollee who is:
    • Age 55 or older and living in the community.
    • Any age who lives in:
       o An inpatient hospital and is required to contribute to
         the cost of care.
       o A nursing home.

Any person who gets all or a combination of the services listed
above may have the cost of those services recovered from their
estate or the estate of their surviving spouse, from non-probate
property, or through a lien.

Which members are not subject to the Estate Recovery
Program?
•   A Medicaid or BadgerCare Plus member who is 55 or older,
    living in the community, and not getting services related to
    long-term care will not be affected by estate recovery.
•   A member participating in a Medicare Savings Program.
    Medicare premium payments and any Medicare cost sharing
    or coinsurance costs paid by the Qualified Medicare
    Beneficiary program are not recoverable.




                                 5
How does the Estate Recovery Program recover the
cost of benefits?
The Estate Recovery Program uses claims in probated estates,
affidavits in small sum estates and non-probate assets, and liens
to recover the cost of Medicaid, BadgerCare Plus, WCDP, COP,
and non-Medicaid Family Care benefits.

The Estate Recovery Program seeks repayment by filing claims in
probate estates to recover the cost for community-based services,
services gotten while participating in a long-term care program,
services gotten while a member lived in a nursing home, services
gotten while a member was considered an institutionalized
member in an inpatient hospital, and WCDP services. If the
member’s estate includes real property, the Estate Recovery
Program may, in certain circumstances, file a lien on the property
rather than get immediate repayment. For more information on
these types of liens, see the Probate Estates section regarding
“Are there situations when the Estate Recovery Program’s estate
claim will not be paid, or payment will be delayed?” on page 13.

An affidavit of the administrator is used to file claims in estates
valued under $50,000 and to recover non-probate assets. As part
of this process, liens may be filed on real property to secure the
Estate Recovery Program’s claim.

Liens may also be filed on homes of Medicaid members who live
in inpatient hospitals and are required to contribute to their cost
of care or who live in nursing homes. Liens are filed only when

                                 6
members are not expected to return to their homes to live. For
more information on these types of liens, see the Liens for
Medicaid Hospital and Nursing Home Residents (TEFRA Liens)
section on page 22. Liens are never filed on the homes of COP
and/or WCDP participants during their lifetime.


When does the Estate Recovery Program not recover
benefits?
The Estate Recovery Program will not seek recovery of any
benefits from a member’s property while the member’s spouse, a
minor child under age 21, or a disabled or blind child of any age
survives the member. However, if the member’s estate property
or non-probate property includes real property, the Estate
Recovery Program will file a lien. Repayment from the lien will be
delayed until after the death of the surviving spouse, any minor
(under age 21) children, and any children who are blind or have a
disability. Although the Estate Recovery Program may file a lien on
the real property of a surviving spouse, or any minor child,
disabled, or blind child of a member, if the spouse or child sells
that property for fair market value during their lifetime, the Estate
Recovery Program will release its lien, and no repayment will be
made.

There are similar protections in the lien portion of the program
that apply to nursing home and hospital inpatient residents. DHS
may only file a lien on the home of a member who lives in a
nursing home or in an inpatient hospital. In addition, DHS may not
file a lien on the home of a nursing home or hospital resident if

                                 7
there is a spouse or minor, disabled, or blind child of any age
residing in the home. DHS will not file a lien on the home of a
member living in the community. For more information on liens,
see the Liens for Medicaid Hospital and Nursing Home Residents
(TEFRA Liens) section on page 22.

The Estate Recovery Program may not recover:
• Personal property (furniture, jewelry, appliances, etc.) until
   sold.
•   Cash donated or given to the family after the member’s death,
    such as memorial money.

Certain income, property, and resources of Native Americans and
Alaska Natives are exempt from estate recovery. These are:
•   Income and resources held in trust status.
•   Trust or non-trust property located within or near a current or
    prior federally recognized reservation, pueblo, or colony; or
    other geographic areas designated by the Bureau of Indian
    Affairs (BIA) Secretary.
       o Other geographic areas are service areas for tribes
         where the BIA provides financial assistance and social
         services programs to Tribal members.
       o Exemptions apply only to a Tribal member’s primary
         residence or homestead.
•   Income and resources derived from reservation land. This
    includes income from rents, leases, usage rights, and natural



                                 8
    resources (the origins must be able to be clearly traced to
    Tribal land).
•   Government reparation payments.
•   Anything not included above that has unique religious,
    spiritual, traditional, and/or cultural significance that support
    survival or a traditional lifestyle according to Tribal law or
    custom.


Exempt non-trust property is protected when it is passed down
from a Native American to a relative. It is not necessary for the
relative to be a Tribal member for this non-trust property to be
exempt.

Certain assets are also exempt from estate recovery for members
who have long-term care insurance policies that qualify under the
Wisconsin Long-Term Care Insurance Partnership (LTCIP) program.

LTCIP is a joint effort between the federal Medicaid Program,
long-term care insurers, DHS, and the Wisconsin Office of the
Commissioner of Insurance. The program’s main purpose is to
provide an incentive for people to plan for meeting their future
long-term care needs, whether in a community-based setting,
such as their own home, or in a nursing home.

The amount paid out by a qualified LTCIP policy on or after
January 1, 2009, is not counted toward the Medicaid asset limit
for eligibility, nor is it recoverable under the Estate Recovery
Program.

                                  9
More information on LTCIP can be found on DHS’s website at
www.dhs.wisconsin.gov/em/ltcip.htm.




Probate Estates

How does DHS recover the cost of benefits through
estates?
A member’s estate includes all assets owned by the member at
the time of death, including, but not limited to, any solely owned
savings or checking accounts, stocks, savings bonds, and real
property. Any assets that become part of the estate after the
death of the member are also subject to the Estate Recovery
Program, including, but not limited to, refunds, inheritances, and
proceeds from certain life insurance policies, annuities, or death
benefits that are payable to the estate. See the Recovery of Non-
Probate Assets after the Member’s Death section on page 16 for
more information about non-probate property, such as life
insurance payable to living beneficiaries and savings or checking
accounts that are jointly-owned or payable on death to a
beneficiary.

The legal process known as probate settles an individual’s estate
by distributing the estate to creditors, heirs, and beneficiaries.
Creditors file claims in estates to ensure payment of a debt owed

                                10
to them. By law, DHS is paid before most other creditors. DHS and
other creditors are paid before any assets are distributed to heirs
or beneficiaries, whether or not there is a will.

There are two ways in which DHS recovers benefits through
estates. When probate is proceeding through a court, DHS will file
a claim for payment with the court and with the individual
handling the estate. When there is no court proceeding, DHS
generally recovers benefits by filing a claim for payment with the
individual handling the estate who uses an alternative statutory
process called transfer by affidavit. For more information, see the
Recovery by Affidavit section on page 18.

When can DHS file a claim in an estate, and what
constitutes the claim amount?
DHS can file a claim in the estate of a member or the member’s
surviving spouse if the member received care paid for by
Medicaid or BadgerCare Plus in any or all of the following
situations:
• While the member resided in a nursing home. The claim
    amount is for the cost of all services received while residing in
    a nursing home that was paid for by Medicaid or BadgerCare
    Plus.
•   While the member was an inpatient in a hospital for a period
    of 30 days or longer and was required to pay a patient liability
    amount. The claim amount is for the cost of all Medicaid or
    BadgerCare Plus covered services received while an inpatient.


                                 11
•   While the member was aged 55 or older and resided in the
    community. The claim amount is for the cost of Medicaid and
    BadgerCare Plus covered home health services, private duty
    nursing services, and personal care services received.
•   For members aged 55 and older participating in a long-term
    care program. The claim amount also includes all Medicaid
    and BadgerCare Plus services received while participating in
    the program.
•   For Medicaid and BadgerCare Plus members aged 55 and
    older receiving long-term care program services through a
    managed care organization (MCO). The monthly capitation
    payment made to the MCO will be recovered.
DHS can also file a claim in the estate of the member or the
member’s surviving spouse, to recover WCDP, COP, and non-
Medicaid Family Care benefits.

How and when will a claim in an estate be paid?
DHS’s claim will usually be paid by the personal representative of
the estate according to standard probate procedures. DHS’s claim
is paid after certain other expenses. Costs paid before DHS’s claim
are:
• Costs of administering the estate, including attorney fees.
•   Reasonable funeral costs.
•   Costs of the last illness, if any, that were not paid by Medicaid,
    BadgerCare Plus, or WCDP.




                                 12
If there are insufficient assets in the estate to pay DHS’s claim in
full, DHS is paid what is available after allowable expenses, and
the recovery is ended for the assets that have been disclosed. This
applies to both claims in court probate proceedings and to DHS’s
recoveries using affidavits.

Are the heirs allowed to keep anything from the
member’s estate?
Yes. In the recovery of a claim against an estate, the court allows
the heirs and beneficiaries to retain up to a total of $5,000 in
value of the following personal property:
• The decedent’s wearing apparel and jewelry held for personal
    use.
•   Household furniture, furnishings, and appliances.
•   Other tangible personal property not used in trade,
    agriculture, or other business, not to exceed $3,000 in value.
Note: This does not allow heirs to retain liquid assets (cash or
assets readily convertible to cash), only personal property.

Are there situations when DHS’s estate claim will not
be paid or payment will be delayed?
Yes, DHS’s claim will not be paid if any of the following exist:

•   A surviving spouse.
•   A child under age 21.
•   A disabled or blind child of any age.

                                 13
However, if there is a surviving spouse, a child under age 21, or a
disabled or blind child of any age and there is an ownership
interest in real property in the member’s estate, payment will be
delayed because a lien will be filed on the real property on behalf
of DHS. A lien filed during probate will not require repayment as
long as the surviving spouse, a child under age 21, or a disabled or
blind child of any age lives.

Note: DHS will file a lien on the real property of a surviving
spouse, a child under age 21, or a disabled or blind child of any
age of a member. But if the surviving spouse, child under age 21,
or disabled, or blind child sells that property for fair market value
during their lifetime, DHS will release its lien, and no recovery will
be made.

Payment of DHS’s claim may also be delayed in other instances.
DHS will file a lien for recording a full or partial satisfaction of its
estate claim if there is a home in the estate and any of the
following resides in the home:
•   A son or daughter of the member who continuously lived in
    the home beginning at least 24 months before the member
    began receiving nursing home services or services provided
    while considered institutionalized in an inpatient hospital or
    home and community-based waiver services and who
    provided care to the member that delayed the member’s
    receipt of such services.
•   A brother or sister of the member who continuously lived in
    the home beginning at least 12 months prior to the member


                                    14
   receiving nursing home services or services provided while
   considered institutionalized in an inpatient hospital or home
   and community-based waiver services.
DHS may recover on these liens when the caretaker child, brother,
or sister dies or sells/transfers the home.
The filing of a lien through an estate may be done for nursing
home members, institutionalized inpatient hospital members, and
community-based members. The reason is that this type of lien is
a result of an estate claim.

How does DHS file a claim in a probate proceeding in a
court?
When an estate is being probated through a court proceeding, the
personal representative or attorney handling the estate is
required to notify DHS of the estate proceeding and of the time
period in which a claim may be filed. DHS then calculates the
amount of its claim and submits the claim to the court with a copy
sent to the personal representative or the attorney.

The personal representative is responsible for the administration
of the estate. The personal representative must make an
inventory of the assets in the estate and determine what claims
the estate must pay. Claims must be paid according to standard
probate laws and procedures.

What is the transfer by affidavit process?



                                15
The transfer by affidavit process can be used to close a person’s
estate when the deceased has $50,000 or less in assets subject to
administration in Wisconsin. It is an alternative to using a court
process for small estates. If this process is used, an heir, guardian,
or trustee of a revocable trust created by the deceased may
collect the deceased’s assets by submitting a transfer by affidavit
to the person, institution, or entity possessing those assets.

By accepting the deceased’s assets, the heir, guardian, or trustee
assumes a duty to pay the deceased’s obligations under the
priority of claims established by state law and to distribute any
remainder to the appropriate heirs and beneficiaries. If an heir,
guardian, or trustee submits a transfer by affidavit to a person,
institution, or entity, he or she must send a copy to DHS if the
deceased received any Medicaid, BadgerCare Plus, WCDP, COP, or
non-Medicaid Family Care benefits. If real property is being
transferred using a transfer by affidavit, DHS may file a lien on the
property. The lien would be satisfied at the time the property is
sold.


Recovery of Non-Probate Assets after the
Member’s Death

The types of recoverable assets DHS can pursue for repayment on
behalf of a member include all property in which the member had
an interest in immediately before death. This includes property
that passes outside a person’s probated estate, including assets


                                  16
transferred through joint tenancy, survivorship, life estate,
revocable trust, or other arrangement.

DHS will recover from jointly-owned and payable-on-death
checking and savings accounts at financial institutions, no matter
when the accounts were established.

DHS will recover from life estates, joint tenancy property (other
than checking and savings accounts), life insurance policies
payable to a living, named beneficiary, and revocable trusts that
were established on or after August 1, 2014. This applies to
recovery of these types of property after the death of the
member.

DHS will not recover for the following created prior to August 1,
2014:
• Life estates
• Joint tenancy property (other than checking and savings
   accounts)
• Life insurance payable to a living, named beneficiary
• Revocable trusts

All other types of non-probate property will be subject to
repayment for members who pass away on or after August 1,
2014.

An affidavit of the administrator will be used to recover non-
probate property. Liens may also be filed on non-probate real
property to secure DHS’s claim.

                                 17
Marital Property

DHS will file a claim in the estate of a member’s surviving spouse.
Repayment will be made from 50 percent of the marital property
in the surviving spouse’s estate.


Recovery by Affidavit of the Administrator

When can and can’t DHS recover the cost of benefits by
use of an affidavit of the administrator?
DHS can submit an affidavit of the administrator to any person,
institution, or entity possessing the property of a deceased
member to recover the cost of benefits. The affidavit states DHS’s
legal claim to the remaining property of the deceased and
explains the rights of heirs, beneficiaries, and co-owners. DHS
uses its affidavit to recover from estates under $50,000 and to
recover non-probate assets.

DHS does not use an affidavit to recover when there is a surviving
spouse, a minor child (under age 21), or a disabled or blind child
of any age and the member’s property (either estate property or
non-probate property) does not include real property.




                                18
DHS also does not use an affidavit to recover against wearing
apparel, jewelry, household furniture, furnishings, and appliances
with a total value less than $5,000.

How does DHS recover benefits by use of an affidavit of
the administrator?
In estates under $50,000 that are settled by use of a transfer by
affidavit, DHS will send its affidavit of the administrator to the
heir, guardian, or trustee presenting DHS’s claim. Normally, DHS
allows the heir, guardian, or trustee to receive the property of the
deceased. The heir, guardian, or trustee can then use the property
to pay any reasonable funeral costs, costs of administering the
estate, and related attorney fees. Any property remaining after
those expenses are paid must be paid to the DHS. Invoices,
receipts, and canceled checks of the expenses must be kept, and
copies sent to DHS. Any medical bills (including those from
ambulance companies) should not be paid until after the charges
are reviewed and approved by the Estate Recovery Program.
Upon transferring all the remaining funds to DHS, the heir,
guardian, or trustee is released from any obligation to other
creditors or heirs of the deceased for the property transferred to
the heir, guardian, or trustee using the affidavit.

For non-probate property, DHS will use similar procedures. DHS
will send its affidavit of the administrator to the co-owners and
beneficiaries of a member’s non-probate property.




                                19
Co-owners and beneficiaries have the right to request a fair
hearing on the value of the member’s interest in the property.

The value of the member’s interest for jointly owned real
property (with person(s) other than the spouse) is equal to the
fractional interest that the member would have in the property if
the property was held with the other owner(s) as tenants in
common. [49.849 (5c)(a)]

The value of the member’s interest for jointly owned personal
property is the percentage interest attributed to the member
when eligibility for assistance was determined or, if not
determined at eligibility, the fractional interest the member had
in the property at their death. [49.849 (5c)(b)]

For life estate interests in real property, the value is the
percentage of ownership based on the member’s age at the date
of death, according to the life estate tables used for Medicaid
eligibility. [49.849 (5c)(c)]

The value of the property is the fair market value. Fair market
value is the price a willing buyer would pay to a willing seller for
purchase of the property. It is the co-owners’ or beneficiaries’
responsibility to establish that value through a credible method,
such as an appraisal by a licensed appraiser. [49.849 (5c)(d)]

When real property is included in the non-probate property, DHS
can file a lien on the property.


                                  20
The lien protections for a surviving spouse or minor, disabled, or
blind child in the affidavit process are the same as for liens filed in
probated estates.


Waiver of Claims Due to Hardship

Are there any exemptions if recovery would cause a
hardship to an heir or beneficiary?
DHS has set standards in Wis. Admin. Code § DHS 108.02(12) for
determining whether DHS’s recovery would result in an undue
hardship for an heir, beneficiary, or co-owner. An heir,
beneficiary, or co-owner may apply for a waiver of the DHS’s
claim on their portion of the estate for one of the following
reasons:
• The heir, beneficiary, or co-owner would become or remain
    eligible for Supplemental Security Income (SSI), FoodShare,
    BadgerCare Plus, or Medicaid if DHS pursued its claim.
•   The deceased’s estate contains real estate used as part of the
    heir, beneficiary, or co-owner’s business, which may be, but is
    not, limited to a working farm, and recovery by DHS would
    affect the property and would result in the heir, beneficiary,
    or co-owner losing their means of a livelihood.
•   The heir, beneficiary, or co-owner is receiving veterans
    benefits based on need under Wis. Stat. § 45.40(1m).




                                  21
The person handling the estate will be notified of these rights and
how an heir or beneficiary may apply for a hardship waiver when
the estate is being probated through a court or through an
affidavit process. That individual is responsible for notifying the
heirs and beneficiaries of these rights. An heir or beneficiary can
apply to DHS for a waiver of the recovery of their portion of the
estate.

In the case of non-probate property, the co-owners or
beneficiaries of the property will be notified of their rights and
how to apply for a hardship waiver. Only co-owners or
beneficiaries of the member’s non-probate property are eligible
to apply for a hardship waiver of their share in the non-probate
property. Other heirs or beneficiaries of the member’s probate
property cannot apply for a hardship waiver of non-probate
property because they have no inheritance or survivorship rights
in the property. They only have an interest in property that passes
through the member’s estate.


Liens for Medicaid Hospital and Nursing Home
Residents (TEFRA Liens)

What is a lien and what effect does it have?
A lien is evidence of a debt or obligation that is filed against a
particular piece of real property with the Register of Deeds in the
county where the property is located. It is like a mortgage in that
it represents a debt that must be satisfied when the property is

                                22
sold. It does not affect the ownership of the property. It does not
require the member to sell their home.

When can DHS file a lien on a home?
Under some circumstances, DHS may file a lien on the home of an
inpatient hospital resident who is required to contribute to the
cost of care or of a nursing home resident who is not reasonably
expected to return home. DHS cannot file a lien on the home of a
member in the community.

Liens are filed when the member has an ownership interest in the
home. The member has an interest when the home is solely
owned, owned with a spouse, owned jointly with someone other
than the spouse, owned with a life estate interest, or owned by
the member’s revocable trust. For a life estate interest, a lien will
only be filed if the life estate was established on or after August 1,
2014. Liens will be filed on all other types of ownership interests
no matter when those interests were established.
Before filing a lien, the Medicaid program must notify the
member (or the responsible party) in writing and inform the
member of the right to an administrative hearing concerning the
lien process.

DHS may file a lien on the home of a hospital or a nursing home
resident only if the member cannot reasonably be expected to
return home and none of the following people reside in the home:
• The member’s spouse, a minor child (under age 21), or a
    disabled or blind child of any age.

                                 23
•   A brother or sister of the member who has an ownership
    interest in the home and has continuously lived in the home
    beginning at least a year prior to the hospital or nursing home
    admission of the Medicaid member.

If a lien is filed on the home, it must be removed if a member
returns home. If the member returns home, the Income
Maintenance worker or the member should contact DHS, and the
lien will be removed.

When will payment of a lien be made?
A lien will be paid when the home is sold. The lien is paid from the
sale amount after the costs of the real estate transaction are paid,
such as the realtor’s fee, any closing costs, and any mortgages on
the home that predate the Estate Recovery Program lien.

A lien will not be paid at the sale of a home, before or after the
member’s death, if the member has a living spouse or a minor
(under age 21), disabled, or blind child. In addition, a lien will not
be enforced after the member’s death as long as either of the
following resides in the home:
• A son or daughter of the member who continuously lived in
    the home beginning at least 24 months before the member
    was admitted to the hospital or nursing home and who
    provided care to the member that delayed the member’s
    admission to the hospital or nursing home.




                                  24
•   A brother or sister of the member who continuously lived in
    the home beginning at least 12 months before the member
    was admitted to the hospital or nursing home.

What constitutes the amount paid by a lien?
At the time a property is sold, a lien enables DHS to recover
specific amounts paid for by Medicaid. DHS may recover funds
for:
• All Medicaid services received while living in a nursing home.
•   All Medicaid services received while a member is
    institutionalized in an inpatient hospital.
•   Home health care services received by members aged 55 or
    older consisting of:
    o Skilled nursing services
    o Home health aide services
    o Home health therapy and speech pathology services
    o Private duty nursing services
    o Personal care services

•   All services received by members aged 55 or older
    participating in a long-term care program (including COP
    Waiver, Community Integration Programs IA, IB, and II, Brain
    Injury Waiver, Community Supported Living Arrangements,
    Community Recovery Services, Family Care, Family Care
    Partnership, IRIS, and PACE).




                               25
•   For members getting long-term care program services through
    a managed care organization (MCO). The monthly capitation
    payment made to the MCO will be recovered.

A lien only recovers for the amount paid by Medicaid for benefits
up to the date of sale. If more benefits are provided after the lien
is paid or if all of the benefits already provided were not payable
from the sale, DHS may file a claim in the member’s estate to
recover additional amounts.


Glossary of Terms

Affidavit of the Administrator
DHS can submit an affidavit of the administrator to any person,
institution, or entity possessing the property of a deceased
member to recover the cost of benefits. The affidavit states DHS’s
legal claim to the remaining property of the deceased and
explains the rights of heirs, beneficiaries, and co-owners. DHS
uses its affidavit to recover from estates under $50,000 and
recover non-probate assets.

DHS does not use an affidavit to recover when there is a surviving
spouse, a minor child (under age 21), or a disabled or blind child
of any age and the member’s property (either estate property or
non-probate property) does not include real property.




                                 26
DHS also does not use an affidavit to recover against wearing
apparel, jewelry, household furniture, furnishings, and appliances
with a total value less than $5,000.

Capitation Payments
Capitation payments are based on a payment per member rather
than a payment per service provided. Managed care organizations
(MCOs) receive a fixed monthly payment for a member enrolled in
a health plan. If a member is enrolled in a long-term care
program, such as a home and community-based waiver program
or PACE, the MCO receives a monthly capitation rate payment for
each enrolled member.

Joint Property
There are two main types of joint property: (1) joint tenancy and
(2) tenancy in common. Under joint tenancy, if two people take
title of the property as joint tenants on a deed, each person has a
100-percent ownership of that piece of property. Regardless of
the number of joint tenants on a deed, each tenant has equal
ownership rights and interest. When one joint tenant passes
away, the surviving tenants automatically own the property. Joint
tenancy automatically gives each tenant a “right of survivorship”
where the surviving tenants receive 100 percent of the property.
When only one joint tenant remains living, he or she receives the
entire property, and the joint tenancy is dissolved.

Tenancy in common provides for multiple percentages of
ownership interest and inheritance rights for the heirs of each


                                27
tenant. These ownership percentages may be equal, such as
50/50, or unequal, such as 60/40. Unlike joint tenancy, tenancy in
common grants no “right of survivorship” to the other tenants.
Thus, no other tenant in common is entitled to receive a share of
the property when the tenant in common passes away; instead,
the percentage share of the property becomes part of the
deceased’s estate.

Liens
A lien is evidence of a debt or obligation that is filed against a
particular piece of property with the Register of Deeds in the
county where the property is located. It is like a mortgage in that
it represents a debt that must be satisfied when the property is
sold. It does not affect the ownership of the property. It does not
require the member to sell their home.

The Estate Recovery Program uses two types of liens:
1. Pre-death liens are imposed on the homes of living Medicaid
   members determined to be permanently institutionalized and
   are not expected to return home to live. These types of liens
   are called TEFRA liens since they must follow rules set out in
   the federal Tax Equity and Fiscal Responsibility Act of 1982.
2. Post death liens, which are often part of the probate process.

Life Estate
A life estate is created when a property holder transfers
ownership of the property to someone else (known as the
remainder and retains the right to reside in and benefit from the


                                28
real estate, such as getting rent. The life tenant’s percentage
interest is determined using the Medicaid life expectancy tables at
the time the life estate was created. The rest of the interest is
owned by the remainder (for example, a child or children). When
the life tenant passes away, the entire property interest passes to
the remainder. Recovery will be made from the life tenant’s
remaining interest at the time of death.

Life Insurance Policy
A life insurance policy is a contract with an insurance company. In
exchange for premiums (payments), the insurance company
provides a lump-sum payment, known as a death benefit, to
beneficiaries in the event of the insured's death.

Long-Term Care Program
Long-term care programs include home and community-based
waiver programs, such as:

•   COP - Waiver
•   Community Integration Program(s) IA, IB, and II
•   Brain Injury Waiver Program
•   Community Supported Living Arrangements
•   Community Recovery Services
•   Family Care
•   Family Care Partnership
•   IRIS
•   PACE




                                29
This is not a complete list of long-term care programs and may
change without notice.

Marital Property
Marital property is property owned by a legally married couple. A
member’s ownership in marital property immediately before
passing away is limited to one-half. This is consistent with the
classification of property of spouses under state law
(Wis. Stat. § 766.31).

Medicaid
Medicaid is a joint federal-state program that provides health care
services to persons who have limited income and resources.
Wisconsin Medicaid is managed by DHS.

Non-Probate Property
Non-probate property is property that passes outside an
individual’s estate. This means that non-probate property does
not go through probate before it is transferred to those who
inherit it. Non-probate property includes, but is not limited to, life
estates, property held in joint tenancy, life insurance proceeds,
most property held in a trust, and property that is payable on
death or transfer on death to a beneficiary.

Person
Person includes all partnerships, associations, and bodies politic
or corporate.




                                  30
Personal Representative
Personal representative means a person, however denominated,
who is authorized to administer a decedent’s estate.

Personal Property
Personal property includes money, goods, chattels, things in
action, evidences of debt and energy. Personal property is any
property that can be moved from one location to another and can
be tangible or intangible. Examples include clothing, jewelry,
furniture, appliances, artwork, vehicles, livestock, money, and
digital assets.

Probate
The legal process known as probate settles an individual’s estate
by distributing the estate to creditors, heirs, and beneficiaries.
Creditors file claims in estates to ensure payment of a debt owed
to them. The state is paid before most other creditors. Both the
state and other creditors are paid before any assets are
distributed to heirs or beneficiaries whether or not there is a will.

Real Property
Real property includes lands, tenements and hereditaments and
all rights thereto and interests therein. Real property, also known
as real estate, is land and any permanent structures or fixtures
attached to it, along with the rights and benefits of ownership.
Real property can include:
• Land, including the surface and everything below or above it
• Buildings, such as houses and office buildings
• Natural resources, such as water, minerals, and growing crops

                                 31
•   Rights of ownership, such as the right to use, sell, lease, or
    possess the land

Revocable Trusts
A trust is a legal document in which a property interest is held by
one person for the benefit of another. Sometimes referred to as a
living trust, a revocable trust is created by an individual who
wants the ability to change the terms of their trust.




                                  32
For Further Information

•   Go to dhs.wi.gov/medicaid/erp.htm.

•   Contact your local agency; to find your local agency visit
    dhs.wi.gov/im-agency.

•   Call Member Services at 1-800-362-3002 (voice) or 711 (TTY).

•   Write to:
    Department of Health Services
    Estate Recovery Program
    P.O. Box 309
    Madison, WI 53701-0309

This publication is also available at
www.dhs.wisconsin.gov/collections/library/p13032.




                                 33
Applicable federal and state laws and administrative code (this
is not an all-inclusive list):
• Sec. 1917. [42 U.S.C. 1396p]: Liens, adjustments and
    recoveries, and transfers of assets
• 46.27(7g), 2017: Long-term support community options
    program
• 46.286(7), 2017: Family care benefit
• 49.496: Recovery of correct medical assistance payments
• 49.682: Recovery from estates; disease aids and funeral
    expenses
• 49.849: Recovery of correct payments under certain public
    assistance programs
• DHS 108.02: Department rights and responsibilities
• 632.697: Benefits subject to department's right to recover
• 859.25: Priority of payment of claims and allowances
• 867.03: Transfer by affidavit
• 867.035: Transfer by affidavit; recipients of certain benefits
• 990.01: Construction of laws; words and phrases




                               34
STATE OF WISCONSIN                 STD PRSRT
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES   US POSTAGE PAID
DIVISION OF MEDICAID SERVICES     MADISON WI
1 W WILSON ST                   PERMIT NO 1369
MADISON WI 53701-0309

