Source URL: https://web.archive.org/web/20250121011553id_/http://www.wvrecovery.com/estate.asp
Retrieved: 2026-09-23

WV Recovery Unit 

 WV Recovery Unit

 Home 

 Trauma Recovery 

 Estate Recovery 

 HIPP 

 Insurance Verification 

 Media 

 M-WIN 

 Contact Us 

 Estate Recovery

 Overview 
Under certain circumstances, Medicare will provide for an individual's nursing home 
 coverage for a limited time. Most people, pay for nursing home care out of their own pocket until they have exhausted their savings, and then 
 rely on Medicaid to pay for their remaining medical expenses. 

 HMS, a Gainwell Technologies Company, is contracted with WV DoHS, Bureau for Medical Services (BMS) to provide Recovery Services for the Estate 
 Recovery Program. Under the West Virginia Probate Code, the State of West Virginia Department of Health and Human Resources as a state agency 
 has priority over certain other private creditors. The personal representative or the attorney probating the estate will use the proceeds from 
 the sale of estate property to reimburse BMS for medical expenses paid on behalf of the recipient. 

 History 
In 1993, Congress enacted the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1993 (OBRA '93) requiring 
 the recovery of medical assistance payments from the estates of deceased Medicaid recipients age 55 and older. In the State of West 
 Virginia, the recovery of medical assistance payments is accomplished by filing a claim against the deceased recipient's estate with 
 the probate court. The identification and verification of estates and the calculation of the appropriate claim amount are conducted 
 in compliance with the state and federal laws and the Medicaid State Plan. 

 Resources

 Notification of Death Form 

 Nursing Home Administrators and Waiver Care Providers: The Notification of Death form is to be filled out and returned for every 
 resident of your facility or participant of your program who was receiving Medicaid benefits. We ask that this form be filled out 
 and returned to us within three days of the recipient's passing. 

 Estate Recovery Brochure 

 The Estate Recovery Brochure will give you a general description of the program and hopefully answer questions you may have. The 
 brochure contains contact information for any further questions. 

 Hardship Waivers 

 During the Estate Recovery process family members are able to request a hardship waiver so that recovery may be waived or, at least, 
 delayed. Please see the complete Hardship Waiver Guidelines. 

 Did You Know? 

 All recoveries are returned to WV BMS and the Federal Government. 

 Federal and State law require the State to pursue repayment of Medicaid funds from any third party responsible for injuries 
 suffered by a Medicaid recipient. 

 © Copyright  HMS Inc. 

 DISCLAIMER 
HMS, a Gainwell Technologies Company, is solely responsible for the accuracy and completeness of the content of this website.
