Source URL: https://www.law.cornell.edu/regulations/wyoming/048-35-Wyo-Code-R-SS-35-12
Retrieved: 2026-09-23

048-35 Wyo. Code R. §§ 35-12 - Undue Hardship Waiver | State Regulations | US Law | LII / Legal Information Institute 

 Please help us improve our site!

 × 

 No thank you 

 Skip to main content 

 Cornell Law
 School 
 Search
 Cornell 

 Toggle navigation 

 Please help
 us improve our site! 

 Support Us! 

 Search 

 About
 LII 

 Who We Are 

 What We Do 

 Who Pays For This 

 Contact Us 

 Get the
 law 

 Constitution 

 Supreme Court 

 U.S. Code 

 CFR 

 Federal Rules 

 Federal Rules of Appellate Procedure 

 Federal Rules of Civil Procedure 

 Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure 

 Federal Rules of Evidence 

 Federal Rules of Bankruptcy Procedure 

 U.C.C. 

 Law by jurisdiction 

 State law 

 Uniform laws 

 Federal law 

 World law 

 Lawyer directory 

 Legal encyclopedia 

 Business law 

 Constitutional law 

 Criminal law 

 Family law 

 Employment law 

 Money and Finances 

 More... 

 Help out 

 Give 

 Sponsor 

 Advertise 

 Create 

 Promote 

 Join Lawyer Directory 

 LII 

 State Regulations 

 Wyoming Administrative Code 

 Agency 048 - Health, Department of 

 Subagency 0037 - Medicaid 

 Chapter 35 - MEDICAID BENEFIT RECOVERY 

 048-35 Wyo. Code R. §§ 35-12 - Undue Hardship Waiver

 048-35 Wyo. Code R. §§ 35-12 - Undue Hardship Waiver 

 State Regulations 

 Compare

 (a) Notice of right
 to request undue hardship waiver. At the time the Department imposes a lien or
 files a probate claim, it shall provide written notice by mail to the personal
 representative or known heirs of the right to request an undue hardship
 waiver.

 (b) Request for undue
 hardship waiver. (i) Any individual who
 receives notice pursuant to subsection (a) may request an undue hardship
 waiver.

 (ii) A request for an undue
 hardship waiver shall be mailed to the Department by certified mail, return
 receipt requested, within thirty-three (33) days of the date of the
 Department's notice pursuant to subsection (a). The request shall include
 documentation that the decedent's home is part of the estate, that the
 decedent's home is part of a business, including a working farm or ranch, show
 that recovery of the home would result in the heirs or beneficiaries losing
 their means of making a living, and provide other relevant documentation upon
 the Department's request. The failure to provide the information required by
 this paragraph with the request shall result in the dismissal with prejudice of
 the undue hardship waiver request.

 (c) Consideration of request. Within thirty
 (30) days of receipt of a request for an undue hardship waiver, the Department
 shall consider whether the information furnished shows an undue hardship.
 During the thirty (30) days of review, the Department may request additional
 information before making a final decision. The request shall be made in
 writing by certified mail, return receipt requested. The party to whom the
 request is directed shall provide the requested information within thirty (30)
 days after the receipt of the certified mail. The Department shall have fifteen
 (15) days from receipt of the additional information to make a decision.
 Failure to provide the requested information shall result in a denial of the
 request. The Department's decision shall be in writing, and shall be delivered
 by certified mail, return receipt requested. If the request is denied, the
 Department shall provide notice of the opportunity to request that the
 Department reconsider the decision.

 (d) Reconsideration. A party may request that
 the Department reconsider a decision to deny an undue hardship waiver. Such
 request shall be made and shall be handled pursuant to the reconsideration
 provisions as set forth in Chapter 3, Section 14, of the Wyoming Medicaid
 Rules. A party may submit any additional relevant information at the time of
 the request. A party that fails to request reconsideration pursuant to this
 section may not subsequently request an administrative hearing pursuant to
 Chapter 4 regarding the adverse action.

 (e) Administrative Hearing. If an
 administrative hearing is requested, it shall be conducted in accordance with
 Wyoming Medicaid Rules, Chapter 4, Medicaid Administrative Hearings, except the
 burden of proof in subsection (f) applies to this Chapter.

 (f) Burden of proof. If an administrative
 hearing is requested, it shall be conducted in accordance with the Wyoming
 Medicaid Rules, Chapter 4, Medicaid Administrative Hearings, except the burden
 of proof in subsection (f) applies to this Chapter.

 Notes

 048 - 35 
 Wyo. Code R. §§
 35-12 

 Amended,
 Eff. 2/19/2019 . 

 State regulations are updated quarterly; we currently have two versions available.
 Below is a comparison between our most recent version and the prior quarterly release. 
 More comparison features will be added as we have more versions to compare.

 No prior version found.

 State Regulations Toolbox

 Accessibility 

 About LII 

 Contact us 

 Advertise here 

 Help 

 Terms of use 

 Privacy
