Source URL: https://www.law.cornell.edu/regulations/wyoming/048-35-Wyo-Code-R-SS-35-11
Retrieved: 2026-09-23

048-35 Wyo. Code R. §§ 35-11 - Estate Recoveries | State Regulations | US Law | LII / Legal Information Institute 

 Please help us improve our site!

 × 

 No thank you 

 Skip to main content 

 Cornell Law
 School 
 Search
 Cornell 

 Toggle navigation 

 Please help
 us improve our site! 

 Support Us! 

 Search 

 About
 LII 

 Who We Are 

 What We Do 

 Who Pays For This 

 Contact Us 

 Get the
 law 

 Constitution 

 Supreme Court 

 U.S. Code 

 CFR 

 Federal Rules 

 Federal Rules of Appellate Procedure 

 Federal Rules of Civil Procedure 

 Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure 

 Federal Rules of Evidence 

 Federal Rules of Bankruptcy Procedure 

 U.C.C. 

 Law by jurisdiction 

 State law 

 Uniform laws 

 Federal law 

 World law 

 Lawyer directory 

 Legal encyclopedia 

 Business law 

 Constitutional law 

 Criminal law 

 Family law 

 Employment law 

 Money and Finances 

 More... 

 Help out 

 Give 

 Sponsor 

 Advertise 

 Create 

 Promote 

 Join Lawyer Directory 

 LII 

 State Regulations 

 Wyoming Administrative Code 

 Agency 048 - Health, Department of 

 Subagency 0037 - Medicaid 

 Chapter 35 - MEDICAID BENEFIT RECOVERY 

 048-35 Wyo. Code R. §§ 35-11 - Estate Recoveries

 048-35 Wyo. Code R. §§ 35-11 - Estate Recoveries 

 State Regulations 

 Compare

 (a) Pursuant to
 W.S. §

 42-4-207(c) , the Department
 may impose a pre-death lien against a client's real property: 
 (i) If the client is an inpatient in a
 nursing facility, intermediate care facility for people with intellectual
 disability, or other medical institution; and the client cannot reasonably be
 expected to be discharged from the facility and return home; or

 (ii) If the client has been institutionalized
 for ninety (90) days or longer without a discharge plan, it is presumed that
 the client will not be discharged and return home; however, an applicant or the
 client will be provided with a notice of their right to a hearing prior to a
 determination being made that the applicant or the client is permanently
 institutionalized.

 (b) 
 Pursuant to W.S. §

 42-4-207(j) , the Department
 may impose a lien upon property of any estate, as defined in W.S. §

 42-4-206(g) , of a deceased
 client for the amount of medical assistance provided while the client was
 fifty-five (55) years of age or older or while the client was an inpatient in a
 nursing facility, intermediate care facility for people with intellectual
 disability or other medical institution. The lien may be imposed regardless of
 the presence in the home of individuals identified in W.S. §

 42-4-207(e) . 
 (i) For estate recovery purposes, the
 Department defines "legal title" for real property in W.S. §

 42-4-206(g) to mean title of
 record in the county public property records.

 (c) If the client has purchased a long-term
 care partnership certified policy, the Department shall take into consideration
 the benefits paid by the policy in determining the extent of estate
 recovery.

 (d) The Department may
 recover against a lien imposed under W.S. §

 42-4-207 only after the death of the client's
 surviving spouse, if any, and: (i) If the
 client has no surviving child who is under age twenty-one (21), or is blind, or
 permanently and totally disabled.

 (e) A claim filed pursuant to W.S. §

 42-4-206(a) against the
 surviving spouse's estate, is limited to the value of the assets of the estate
 determined to exist at the time of death of the surviving spouse that were
 marital property or jointly owned property at any time during the
 marriage.

 (f) The Department may
 foreclose its lien outside the probate action pursuant to W.S. §§

 2-7-717 .

 (g) Procedures for recovery from non-probate
 estate. (i) The Department shall have the
 right to recover from non-probate assets pursuant to W.S. §§

 42-4-206 or 207, and shall have the
 discretion to decide how to proceed.

 (ii) The Department shall have the right to
 recover directly from a transferee or other individual or entity which has
 possession, control, or ownership of property received from the non-probate
 estate of a deceased client.

 (h) Any lien or claim against the estate or
 assets of a client age fifty-five (55) years or older when receiving medical
 assistance or an inpatient in a facility, intermediate care facility for people
 with intellectual disability or other medical institution shall be limited to
 amounts expended for nursing facility services, home and community-based
 services including waiver services, related hospital and prescription drug
 services, and any items or services under the State Plan.

 (i) Reasonable expenses incurred in
 preserving or disposing of the assets are only allowed if: 
 (i) They are documented with specificity and
 by an itemized statement or ledger of expenses with copies of
 receipts,

 (ii) They are paid by
 someone other than the client (use of the client's personal funds will not be
 reimbursable), and

 (iii) They were
 paid after one of the following events occurred: 
 (A) Client entered a nursing facility, an
 assisted living facility, an intermediate care facility for people with
 intellectual disability, or other medical institution, never returned home, and
 failed to pay the expenses; or

 (B) 
 Client passed away.

 (j) The Department may decline to pursue an
 estate recovery if it determines that it is not cost-effective to
 recover.

 (k) Bona Fide Efforts to
 Sell. The Department may enter into a stipulation and consent agreement with
 Medicaid client(s), heirs, or legatees when the following conditions are met: 
 (i) The client has received Medicaid for a
 period of at least six (6) months;

 (ii) Net proceeds shall be paid to the
 Department to reimburse medical payments made on behalf of the
 client;

 (iii) The property shall be
 actively placed on the market;

 (iv) 
 The property shall not be sold for less than eighty percent (80%) of fair
 market value, unless the Department provides approval of the sale of the
 property for less than eighty percent (80%) of its value; and

 (v) If the net proceeds exceed the amount of
 the Medicaid benefits paid, Medicaid will receive payment in full for the
 benefits and services provided to the Medicaid client(s) and eligibility for
 benefits shall be redetermined.

 Notes

 048 - 35 
 Wyo. Code R. §§
 35-11 

 Amended,
 Eff. 2/19/2019 . 

 State regulations are updated quarterly; we currently have two versions available.
 Below is a comparison between our most recent version and the prior quarterly release. 
 More comparison features will be added as we have more versions to compare.

 No prior version found.

 State Regulations Toolbox

 Accessibility 

 About LII 

 Contact us 

 Advertise here 

 Help 

 Terms of use 

 Privacy
