Source URL: https://wyoleg.gov/statutes/compress/title02.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-09-23

      TITLE 2 - WILLS, DECEDENTS' ESTATES AND PROBATE CODE

                   CHAPTER 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS

    ARTICLE 1 - CITATIONS, CONSTRUCTION AND GENERAL PROCEDURE

     2-1-101.    Short title.

This act may be cited as the "Wyoming Probate Code".

     2-1-102.    Rules of construction and applicability.

     (a) This code shall be liberally construed and applied, to
promote the following purposes and policies to:

          (i) Simplify and clarify the law concerning the
affairs of decedents, missing persons, protected persons, minors
and incapacitated persons;

          (ii) Discover and make effective the intent of a
decedent in distribution of his property;

          (iii) Promote a speedy and efficient system for
liquidating the estate of the decedent and making distribution
to his successors;

          (iv)    Facilitate use and enforcement of certain
trusts.

     (b) Unless displaced by the particular provisions of this
code, the principles of law and equity supplement the code
provisions.

     (c) This code is a general act intended as a unified
coverage of its subject matter and no part of it shall be deemed
impliedly repealed by subsequent legislation if it can
reasonably be avoided.

     (d) The procedure herein prescribed shall govern all
proceedings in probate brought after the effective date of this
code. It shall also govern further procedure in proceedings in
probate then pending unless the court determines its application
in particular proceedings or parts thereof is not feasible or
will work an injustice, in which event the former procedure
shall apply.

     2-1-103.    Objections to appointments.
For appointments made pursuant to the Wyoming Probate Code,
unless a shorter period of time is specified in the code or by
the court, or where an appointment will be made with no hearing
or no notice, all persons having an objection to the appointment
of any person as a personal representative, administrator,
executor, trustee, conservator, fiduciary or receiver shall file
the objection in the court considering the appointment no less
than five (5) days prior to any hearing scheduled to consider
the appointment. A court may waive this requirement upon a
showing of good cause.

            ARTICLE 2 - DISTRIBUTION BY AFFIDAVIT AND
                        SUMMARY PROCEDURE

     2-1-201. Payment of indebtedness and delivery of tangible
personal property or instruments evidencing debt.

     (a) Not earlier than thirty (30) days after the death of a
decedent, any person indebted to the decedent or having
possession of tangible personal property or an instrument
evidencing a debt, obligation, stock or chose in action
belonging to the decedent shall make payment of the indebtedness
or deliver the tangible personal property or the instrument
evidencing the debt, obligation, stock or chose in action to the
person or persons claiming to be the distributee or distributees
of the property or the attorney for the distributee or
distributees, upon being presented an affidavit, filed as
provided by subsection (c) of this section, made by or on behalf
of the distributee or distributees stating:

          (i) The value of the entire estate located in Wyoming
subject to administration, either testate or intestate, less
liens and encumbrances, does not exceed four hundred thousand
dollars ($400,000.00);

          (ii)   Thirty (30) days have elapsed since the death of
the decedent;

          (iii) No application for appointment of a personal
representative is pending or has been granted in any
jurisdiction in this state;

          (iv) The person or persons claiming to be a
distributee or distributees are entitled to payment or delivery
of the property of the decedent; the facts concerning the
distributee's or distributees' relationship to the decedent and
concerning the legal basis upon which the distributee or
distributees claim entitlement to such property, including facts
regarding any intervening estates or other parties who may have
a claim of entitlement from the decedent and from whom the
applicant distributee or distributees claim and that there are
no other distributees of the decedent having a right to succeed
to the property under probate proceedings in any jurisdiction;
and

          (v) If an application for appointment of a personal
representative has been made in a jurisdiction outside of
Wyoming:

               (A) The name and address of the proposed or
appointed personal representative, the date of the application
and the date of any appointment; and

               (B) The title of the proceedings and name of the
court and jurisdiction in which the application was made.

     (b) The transfer agent for any security shall change the
registered ownership on the books of a corporation from the
decedent to the distributee or distributees upon presentation of
an affidavit as provided in subsections (a) and (c) of this
section.

     (c) When the affidavit is filed with the county clerk and
a certified copy is presented to any person with custody of the
decedent's property or a holder of the decedent's property, the
affidavit shall be honored and have the effect as provided in
this section and W.S. 2-1-202.

     (d) The county clerk of the county in which any vehicle is
registered shall transfer title of the vehicle from the decedent
to the distributee or distributees upon presentation of an
affidavit as provided in subsection (a) of this section.

     (e) Upon presentation of an affidavit as provided in this
section, a person with custody of the decedent's property or a
holder of the decedent's property shall pay or deliver any of
the decedent's property held or on deposit in the sole name of
the decedent, together with the interest and dividends thereon,
to the distributee or distributees. A receipt for the payment by
the distributee or distributees or proof of delivery by the
custodian or holder of the decedent's property shall constitute
a valid and sufficient release and discharge for the payment or
delivery made.
     2-1-202.   Effect; refusal to pay, deliver.

     (a) The person having custody of the decedent's property
or a holder of the decedent's property:

          (i) Paying, delivering, transferring or issuing
personal property or the evidence thereof pursuant to affidavit
is discharged and released to the same extent as if he dealt
with a personal representative of the decedent; and

          (ii) Is not required to see to the application of the
personal property or evidence thereof or to inquire into the
truth of any statement in the affidavit.

     (b) If any person having custody of the decedent's
property or a holder of decedent's property to whom an affidavit
is delivered refuses to pay, deliver, transfer or issue any
personal property or evidence thereof, the property may be
recovered or its payment, delivery, transfer or issuance
compelled upon proof of right in an action by or on behalf of
the persons entitled thereto. If an action is brought under this
subsection, the court shall award reasonable attorney's fees and
costs of the action to the plaintiff if the court finds that the
decedent's property was not paid, delivered, transferred or
issued within forty-five (45) days after presentation of the
affidavit under W.S. 2-1-201 unless the court finds just cause
for the refusal to pay, deliver or transfer the property.

     (c) Any person to whom payment, delivery, transfer or
issuance is made is answerable and accountable to a personal
representative of the estate or to any other person having a
like or superior right.

     (d) For purposes of this article, "holder" means any
person who is in possession of property of the decedent and
includes but is not limited to a security broker, security
dealer, bank, savings and loan institution, credit union or any
other like depository.

     2-1-203. Deposits by minors or persons under a disability;
joint and trust deposits; pay-on-death accounts.

     (a) Deposits by minors or other persons under a legal
disability may be paid on the order of the depositor and the
payments are legally valid.
     (b) Any portion of a deposit by two (2) or more persons
payable to either or any depositor, or to the survivor of the
depositors, and interest or dividends thereon, may be paid in
accordance with the contract of deposit. The receipt of the
payment by the person paid is a valid and sufficient release and
discharge to the financial institution for any payment made.

     (c) Any portion of a deposit by any person in trust for
another and interest or dividends thereon, in the absence of
other written notice to the financial institution of the
existence and terms of a legal and valid trust, may be paid to
the persons for whom the deposit was made in the event of death
of the depositor.

     (d) Any payable on death (P.O.D.) account may be paid, on
request, to any original party to the account. Payment may be
made, on request, to the P.O.D. payee or in equal proportions to
multiple P.O.D. payees upon presentation to the financial
institution of proof of death showing that the P.O.D. payee or
payees survived all persons named as original payees. Payment
may be made to the personal representative or heirs of a
deceased original payee if proof of death is presented to the
financial institution showing that his decedent was the survivor
of all other persons named on the account either as an original
payee or as P.O.D. payee. The receipt of the payment by the
person paid is a valid and sufficient release and discharge to
the financial institution for any payment made. A person named
as a payee in a P.O.D. account has no enforceable rights therein
during the lifetime of the person or persons creating the
account. As used in this subsection:

          (i) "P.O.D. account" means an account payable on
request to one (1) person during his lifetime and on his death
to one (1) or more P.O.D. payees, or to one (1) or more persons
during their lifetimes and on the death of all of them to one
(1) or more P.O.D. payees;

          (ii) "P.O.D. payee" means a person designated on a
P.O.D. account as one to whom the account is payable on request
after the death of all original payees.

     2-1-204. Collection of claims of certain creditors of
decedent by affidavit.

     (a) Not earlier than ninety (90) days after the death of a
decedent, the United States, or any agency or instrumentality
thereof, or the state of Wyoming, or any agency, instrumentality
or political subdivision thereof, to whom the decedent was
indebted or to whom the decedent's estate would be indebted if
the estate were being administered upon, may collect all of the
assets of the decedent referred to in W.S. 2-1-201, upon
presentation of an affidavit to the parties referred to in W.S.
2-1-201, stating:

          (i) The value of the entire estate, wherever located,
less liens and encumbrances, does not exceed four hundred
thousand dollars ($400,000.00);

          (ii)   Ninety (90) days have elapsed since the death of
the decedent;

          (iii) No application for appointment of a personal
representative is pending or has been granted in any
jurisdiction;

          (iv) To the best knowledge of the affiant, no
affidavit pursuant to W.S. 2-1-201, in connection with the
decedent, has been presented to any party referred to in W.S.
2-1-201;

          (v) The facts concerning the creditor's claim being
made by the party on behalf of whom the affidavit is presented,
the total amount of the claim, and any payments received thereon
from any source whatsoever; and

          (vi) That by presentation of the affidavit the party
on behalf of whom the affidavit is presented:

               (A) Waives any immunities from suit or levy of
execution it might otherwise have;

               (B) Agrees to indemnify and hold harmless from
all claims whatsoever any party delivering assets on the basis
of such affidavit, to the extent of the full value of the assets
so delivered; and

               (C) Is answerable and accountable to a personal
representative of the estate, if appointed, or to any other
person or party having a superior right.

     (b) When filed with the county clerk and a certified copy
thereof is presented to a party with custody of assets, the
affidavit shall be honored and shall have the effects as
provided for in W.S. 2-1-201(b), (c) and (d) and 2-1-202.
     (c) If the total assets collected by a creditor designated
in this section, by virtue of the affidavit or affidavits,
exceed the net balance of the creditor's claim, then the
creditor shall:

          (i) Pay the overplus to any other creditor who
proceeds properly under this section or, if there is no such
creditor;

          (ii) Pay the overplus to the distributees named in an
affidavit prepared and presented pursuant to W.S. 2-1-201, or,
if none such be presented;

          (iii) Obtain an order from the probate court which
would have jurisdiction were the estate being administered upon,
designating itself the agent pursuant to W.S. 2-15-101, and
thereupon proceed as provided in Chapter 15 of the Wyoming
Probate Code.

     2-1-205. Summary procedure for distribution of personal or
real property; application for decree; notice by publication;
presumptive evidence of title; effect of false statements.

     (a) If any person dies who is the owner of personal or
real property, including mineral interests, but whose entire
estate including personal property does not exceed four hundred
thousand dollars ($400,000.00), less liens and encumbrances, the
person or persons claiming to be the distributee or distributees
of the decedent may file, not earlier than thirty (30) days
after the decedent's death, an application for a decree of
summary distribution of property.

     (b) The application shall be sworn to and signed by any
person claiming to be a distributee and shall state the facts
required by W.S. 2-1-201(a)(i) through (v). The application
shall also fully describe any real property, including any
mineral interests, being claimed.

     (c) The application shall have attached thereto a sworn
report of value which may be based upon a broker's price opinion
as defined by W.S. 33-28-102(b)(lxii), made by a person who has
no legal interest in the estate, showing the value on the date
of the decedent's death of all interests owned by the decedent
in real property located in Wyoming, including mineral
interests.
     (d) Subject to subsection (j) of this section, a notice of
application for a decree of summary distribution of property
shall be published once a week for two (2) consecutive weeks in
a newspaper of general circulation in the county in which the
application was filed. The notice of application shall be served
by first class mail to the last known address, with copy of
application attached, to the surviving spouse of the decedent,
if any, and to all other distributees, so far as known, or to
their guardians if any of them are minors, or to their personal
representatives if any of them are deceased and to any
reasonably ascertainable creditors not later than ten (10) days
after the date of first publication.

     (e) If the decedent received medical assistance pursuant
to W.S. 42-4-101 through 42-4-114, the state department of
health shall be provided a copy of the application for a decree
within ten (10) days after the date of first publication.

     (f) An objection to an application shall be filed before
the expiration of the later of twenty (20) days after the
mailing required by subsection (d) of this section or thirty
(30) days after the date of first publication. An untimely
objection is forever barred. If no timely objection is filed,
the court shall enter a decree establishing the right and title
to the property located in Wyoming. A certified copy of the
decree shall be recorded in the office of the county clerk of
each county in which the real property, including mineral
interests, is located. Upon recording of the decree, the decree
and the record thereof shall be presumptive evidence of title to
the property. If an objection to the application is filed within
the time provided in this subsection, the court shall set the
matter for a hearing, after which the court shall enter an order
either denying or granting the application.

     (g) In the event that the decree is entered as the result
of an application containing a materially false statement, title
to the property which passes as a result of the decree shall not
be affected but the person or persons signing as distributee or
distributees and knowingly swearing to a materially false
statement in the application shall be subject to the appropriate
penalties for perjury. Any distributee who is damaged by an
application containing a material false statement may file an
action to amend the decree, and for damages. The action shall
be filed in the court in which the application was filed. Any
action under this paragraph is barred unless commenced within
two (2) years from the entry of the decree.
     (h) The procedure provided by this section may be used in
addition to the affidavit procedure provided by W.S. 2-1-201.

     (j) Notice to the agent or attorney of any party entitled
to notice under this section is notice to that party.

     (k) Distributions of property under this article to a
person who claims title to the decedent's property through
intervening estates is authorized if the person is a distributee
as defined in W.S. 2-1-209.

     (m) A distributee who has satisfied the requirements of
this section and W.S. 2-1-201 is entitled to a decree of summary
distribution and no further action under this title is required.

     2-1-206.   Proof of publication and service; filing with
clerk.

     (a) The proof of publication of the notice required under
W.S. 2-1-205(d) shall be by affidavit of the publisher.

     (b) The proof of service under W.S. 2-1-205(d) shall be
signed by a distributee who signed the application or his
attorney and shall state the name and address of the person
served and the manner of service.

     (c) The affidavit for proof of publication and the proof
of service shall be filed with the clerk of court prior to the
court taking action on the application.

     (d) Proof of service by a distributee shall be signed
under penalty of perjury.

     2-1-207.   Missing distributees.

     (a) The person or persons claiming to be the distributee
or distributees of the decedent who filed the application shall
make reasonable efforts to identify and locate all living
distributees of the decedent having a right to succeed to the
interests of the decedent in the property described in the
application. If all distributees are not located, the
distributee or distributees filing the application shall advise
the court of the efforts made to locate missing distributees.
"Missing distributees" means distributees who were identified
pursuant to this subsection but who could not be located. If a
distributee cannot be located, the court shall grant the
application as follows:
          (i) In the case of an interest in real property, the
interest shall be set over to the missing distributee or
distributees if known; and

          (ii) In the case of all other interests, the court
may direct that the share of the missing distributee or
distributees be paid to the state treasurer under the Uniform
Unclaimed Property Act, W.S. 34-24-101 through 34-24-140.

     (b) The person or persons claiming to be a distributee or
distributees of the decedent who filed the application shall
report to the court upon payment of the share of the missing
distributee or distributees.

     (c) The court may order the missing distributee's or
distributees' share to be liquidated for value.

     2-1-208.    Venue generally.

     (a) An application for a decree under W.S. 2-1-205 shall
be filed as follows:

          (i) If the decedent was a resident of Wyoming at the
time of his death, in the county of which the decedent was a
resident;

          (ii) If the decedent was not a resident of Wyoming at
the time of his death, in a county in which any part of the
estate is located.

     2-1-209.    "Distributee" defined.

     (a) As used in this article, "distributee" means as
defined in W.S. 2-1-301(a)(xiii) and includes any person who is
a successor in interest to the decedent:

          (i)    As an heir;

          (ii)    As a beneficiary;

          (iii) Through the intervening estates of the
decedent's heirs, beneficiaries, successors or assigns; or

          (iv)    Through an established record of ownership.

                       ARTICLE 3 - DEFINITIONS
     2-1-301.    Generally.

     (a) When used in this code, unless otherwise defined or
required by the context, the following words and phrases shall
be construed as follows:

          (i) "Administrator" means any person appointed by the
court to administer an intestate estate;

          (ii)    "Bequeath" includes the word "devise" when used
as a verb;

          (iii)    "Bequest" includes the word "devise" when used
as a noun;

          (iv) "Charges" include costs of administration,
funeral expenses, cost of monument and federal and state estate
taxes;

          (v) "Child" includes an adopted child but does not
include a grandchild or other more remote descendent;

          (vi) "Clerk" means clerk of the district court in the
county in which the matter is pending and includes the term
clerk of the probate court;

          (vii) "Conservator" means a person appointed by the
court to have the custody and control of the property of a ward
under the provisions of this code;

          (viii) "Costs of administration" include court costs,
fiduciary's fees, attorney fees, all appraisers' fees, premiums
on corporate surety bonds, cost of continuation of abstracts of
title, recording fees, transfer fees, agents' fees allowed by
order of court, and all other fees and expenses allowed by order
of court in connection with the administration of the estate;

          (ix) "Debts" include liabilities of the decedent
which survive, whether arising in contract, tort or otherwise;

          (x) "Devise" when used as a noun, means the
testamentary disposition of property, both real and personal;

          (xi) "Devise" when used as a verb, means to dispose
of property, both real and personal, by a will;
          (xii)   "Devisee" includes legatee;

          (xiii) "Distributee" means a person entitled to any
property of the decedent under his will or under the statutes of
intestate succession;

          (xiv) "Estate" means the real and personal property
of a decedent, a ward or a trust, as from time to time changed
in form by sale, reinvestment or otherwise, and augmented by any
accretions, additions or substitutions, or diminished by any
decreases and distributions therefrom;

          (xv) "Executor" means any person appointed by the
court to administer the estate of a testate decedent;

          (xvi) "Fiduciary" means a personal representative,
executor, administrator, guardian, conservator or trustee;

          (xvii) "Full age" means the state of legal majority
having attained the age of eighteen (18) years;

          (xviii) "Guardian" means the person appointed by the
court to have custody of the person of the ward under the
provisions of this code;

          (xix) "Guardian of the property" means "conservator"
and may be used at the election of the person appointed by the
court to have the custody and care of the property of a ward;

          (xx) "Heir" means any person except the surviving
spouse, who is entitled to property of a decedent under the
statutes of intestate succession;

          (xxi) "Incompetent" includes any person who has been
adjudicated by a court to be incapable of managing his property,
or caring for his own person, or both;

          (xxii) "Issue" for the purposes of intestate
succession, includes all lawful lineal descendents of a person,
whether natural or adopted, except those who are the lineal
descendents of his living descendents;

          (xxiii) "Legacy" means a testamentary disposition of
personal property;

          (xxiv) "Legatee" means a person entitled to personal
property under a will;
          (xxv) "Letters" include letters testamentary, letters
of administration, letters of guardianship, letters of
conservatorship and letters of trusteeship;

          (xxvi) "Minor" means a person who has not attained
the age of eighteen (18) years;

          (xxvii)     "Person" includes natural persons and
corporations;

          (xxviii)     "Personal representative" includes executor
and administrator;

            (xxix)   "Property" includes both real and personal
property;

          (xxx) "Surviving spouse" means the surviving wife or
husband, as the case may be;

          (xxxi) "Temporary administrator" means any person
appointed by the court to care for an estate pending the
probating of a proposed will, or to handle any special matters
designated by the court;

          (xxxii) "Trustee" means any person appointed as
trustee by the instrument creating the trust, or any person
appointed by the court to administer the trust;

          (xxxiii) "Trusts" include only testamentary trusts;
express trusts where jurisdiction is specifically conferred on
the court by the trust instrument; express trusts where the
jurisdiction of the court is invoked by the trustee, beneficiary
or any interested party; and trusts which are established by a
judgment or a decree of court which results in administration of
the trust by the court;

          (xxxiv) "Will" includes a codicil, a testamentary
instrument that merely appoints an executor, or a testamentary
instrument that merely revokes or revives another will.

                        ARTICLE 4 - DISCLAIMERS

     2-1-401.   Right to disclaim.

     (a) Any person may disclaim any interest in property which
without a disclaimer he would receive by gift, bequest, devise,
inheritance, beneficiary designation, the exercise of a power of
appointment or would pass by right of survivorship.

     (b) Except to the extent a fiduciary's right to disclaim
is expressly restricted or limited by another statute of this
state or by the instrument creating the fiduciary relationship,
a fiduciary may disclaim any interest in property which without
a disclaimer he would receive by gift, bequest, devise,
inheritance, beneficiary designation, the exercise of a power of
appointment or would pass by right of survivorship, whether
acting in a personal or representative capacity. A fiduciary
acting under a power of attorney shall have the right to
disclaim an interest in property if expressly authorized to
disclaim the interest under the terms of the instrument creating
the power of attorney.

     2-1-402.   Definitions.

     (a)   As used in Article 4:

          (i) "Any interest in property" includes, but is not
limited to an undivided portion of an interest and a power with
respect to property;

          (ii) "Disclaimer" means an irrevocable and
unqualified refusal by a person to accept an interest in
property;

          (iii) "Fiduciary" means a personal representative,
trustee, agent acting under a power of attorney or other person
authorized to act as a fiduciary with respect to the property of
another person.

     2-1-403.   Qualification; effective date.

     (a)   To qualify as a disclaimer:

          (i) There shall be a written irrevocable and
unqualified refusal by the disclaimant to accept an interest in
property; and

          (ii) The writing shall be received by the transferor
of the interest, his legal representative or the holder of the
legal title to the property to which the interest relates within
nine (9) months after the later of:
               (A) The day on which the transfer creating the
interest in the person is made; or

               (B) The day on which the person attains age
twenty-one (21); and

          (iii) The disclaimant has not accepted the interest
or any of its benefits; and

          (iv) As a result of a refusal under this subsection,
the interest passes without any direction on the part of the
person making the disclaimer and passes either:

                (A)   To the spouse of the decedent; or

                (B)   To a person other than the person making the
disclaimer.

     (b) A written transfer of the transferor's entire interest
in the property shall be treated as a qualified disclaimer if
the written transfer:

          (i) Meets requirements similar to the requirements of
paragraphs (a)(ii) and (iii) of this section; and

          (ii) Is to a person who would have received the
property if the transferor had made a qualified disclaimer
within the meaning of subsection (a) of this section.

     (c) Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent
the disclaimant from benefits as an income beneficiary of any
trust established by the transferor's will.

     (d) A written irrevocable disclaimer of an interest in
property that does not otherwise qualify as a qualified
disclaimer under subsection (a) or (b) of this section shall be
effective to terminate and pass an interest in property if the
disclaiming party acknowledges in a prior or contemporaneous
writing that the disclaimer does not qualify as a disclaimer for
federal or other tax purposes under this section.

     2-1-404.   Disposition of disclaimed interest.

     (a) Unless otherwise expressly provided in the deed of
gift or will:
          (i) The interest disclaimed reverts to the transferor
if he is living on the date of disclaimer; or

          (ii) The interest disclaimed passes under the
residuary clause of transferor's will if he died prior to the
disclaimer. If the disclaimant is a residuary beneficiary under
the will the interest disclaimed passes as though the
disclaimant did not survive the transferor.

     (b) If the transferor died intestate prior to the
disclaimer, the interest disclaimed passes under the laws of
descent and distribution as though the disclaimant did not
survive the transferor.

     (c) If the interest disclaimed would have passed by right
of survivorship, the interest shall pass as though the
disclaimant was not a survivor.

     2-1-405.   Disclaimer on behalf of person under disability.

A duly appointed, qualified and acting guardian of the property
of an incompetent or a person under the age of twenty-one (21)
years may make a disclaimer on behalf of his ward, upon a
showing satisfactory to the court having jurisdiction over the
guardianship that the disclaimer is in the best interests of the
ward. A guardian of the property may be appointed by the court
for the sole purpose of filing with the court an application for
approval of a disclaimer.

                 ARTICLE 5 - DISPOSAL OF PROPERTY

     2-1-501.   Disposal of controlled substances.

A person is authorized to collect any controlled substances of
the decedent for purposes of disposal in accordance with 21
C.F.R. part 1317.30 and 21 C.F.R. part 1317.35.

                     CHAPTER 2 - PROBATE COURT

                      ARTICLE 1 - IN GENERAL

     2-2-101.   Exclusive jurisdiction conferred on district
courts.

The district courts of the state have exclusive original
jurisdiction of all matters relating to the probate and contest
of wills and testaments, the granting of letters testamentary
and of administration, and the settlement and distribution of
decedents' estates. The court granting the letters has exclusive
jurisdiction of all matters touching the settlement and
distribution of the estates for which letters have been granted.
The jurisdiction over subject matter of the district court
sitting in probate, sometimes referred to in this Title 2 as the
"probate court", is coextensive with the jurisdiction over
subject matter of the district court in any civil action. A
decree of distribution entered by the district court in probate,
pursuant to W.S. 2-7-807 or 2-7-813, shall be a final
determination of title as to assets described therein, as to all
distributees served with notice, or who have waived notice, of
the hearing provided for in W.S. 2-7-807 or 2-7-811, as the case
may be. As to all other parties, an action may be brought and
maintained at any time prior to the entry of final decree of
distribution under W.S. 2-7-813, by or against the personal
representative in the district court, sitting in probate,
seeking any legal or equitable remedy as to any interest in
property, real or personal, in which the estate asserts or
claims any interest. In addition, all causes cognizable in the
district court in any civil action may be brought and
maintained, at any time prior to the entry of final decree of
distribution under W.S. 2-7-813, by or against a personal
representative in the district court sitting in probate which
granted the letters to the personal representative.

     2-2-102.   Venue generally.

     (a) Wills shall be proved and letters testamentary or of
administration granted:

           (i) In the county of which the decedent was a
resident at the time of his death, regardless of where he may
have died;

          (ii) In the county in which the decedent died,
leaving estate therein, if the decedent was not a resident of
the state at the time of his death;

          (iii) In the county in which any part of the estate
may be, if the decedent died out of the state and was not
resident thereof at the time of his death;

          (iv) In the county in which any part of the estate
may be, if the decedent was not a resident of the state and did
not leave estate in the county in which he died;
          (v) In all other cases, in the county in which the
decedent died, and application for letters is made.

     2-2-103.   Jurisdiction of estate of nonresident.

When the estate of the decedent is in more than one (1) county,
the decedent having died out of the state and not being a
resident thereof at the time of his death, or being a
nonresident and dying within the state but not leaving estate in
the county where he died, the district court of that county in
which application is first made for letters testamentary or of
administration has exclusive jurisdiction of the settlement of
the estate.

     2-2-104.   Court to remain open.

For the purpose of granting probate of wills, issuing letters
testamentary and of administration, filing reports, accounts and
petitions of personal representatives, filing claims against the
estate and issuing process and notices required by the Probate
Code, the court shall operate under the same term of court as
specified in W.S. 5-3-101(b).

     2-2-105.   Repealed by Laws 2019, ch. 54, § 2.

     2-2-106.   Powers and duties of court commissioners;
generally.

The court commissioner of each district court shall, upon a
general order made for that purpose, examine the bonds filed by
the personal representatives, with a view to ascertaining their
sufficiency, and may approve the same. He may examine any
inventory, sale bill, account current, except final accounts and
vouchers filed therewith, or examine into the condition of an
estate generally. Upon a specific order of the court, the
commissioner may make orders for the sale of personal property
at public or private auction, for the compounding of debts, for
the settlement of an estate as insolvent, for the approval of
bonds and all other orders of an ex parte nature as may
facilitate the settlement of estates. The orders shall be in
writing, signed by the judge or commissioner issuing the same,
and shall be filed and recorded.

     2-2-107. Powers and duties of court commissioners;
compelling attendance of witnesses; process.
In order to make such examination, the court commissioner is
entitled to process to compel the personal representative and
other witnesses to appear and testify before him on the hearing,
and for the production of books, papers, monies or other things
pertinent to the matter to be heard.

     2-2-108. Powers and duties of court commissioners;
compelling attendance of witnesses; failure to appear or
testify.

Any person refusing to appear or testify before a commissioner
may be cited for contempt and held to bail to answer to the
alleged contempt as soon as reasonably possible. The
commissioner shall report his findings upon the matter in
writing, to the court for its action. Exception may be filed to
the report which shall be heard and determined as in other
cases.

     2-2-109.   Authority of other judges to act when district
judge sick.

Whenever any judge of the district court is absent from the
state, sick or otherwise unable to attend to the duties of his
office, any other district judge shall have the same powers as
the original judge, including the power to examine into all
matters, make all orders and direct the affairs of the
administration of estates.

     2-2-110.   When judge disqualified; exception.

When the judge before whom probate matters are brought is
interested as next of kin to the decedent, or as the legatee or
devisee under the will, or has any other interest in the outcome
of, or concerning the matters brought before him, he shall call
in some other district judge to hear and determine all such
matters. Being a witness to a will does not itself disqualify a
district judge, after the will has been probated, from hearing
any matters concerning the will or the estate being probated
except matters relating to the admission of the will to probate
and contests thereon, and the granting of letters testamentary
or of administration thereunder.

     2-2-111.   Presumption after ten years notices properly
given.

In any estate, wherein a decree of final settlement and
distribution is or has been entered by any court of this state
it shall, after ten (10) years from the date of the decree, be
conclusively presumed that all notices required by law have been
made and for the times and in the manner required by law.

                            ARTICLE 2 - CLERK

     2-2-201. Records required to be kept; probate docket;
reports to be made by commissioner.

     (a) The clerk of district court in each county shall
maintain a system for the recording of wills and probate
including:

          (i) Proceedings of the guardianship of infants and
incompetent persons;

            (ii)    All letters testamentary and of administration;

          (iii) All inventories and records of sales of
personal estate;

            (iv)    A general entry, claim and allowance docket.

     (b) The clerk of district court shall maintain a system
for the recording of each decedent's estate including all
proceedings concerning the probate of each will, the entry of
the inventory appraisement, all claims allowed, including costs
of the final distribution of the estate, and the final
settlement of the estate.

     (c) The clerk of court shall prepare for the use of the
court a probate docket containing:

            (i)    All appointments made;

          (ii) All pending petitions for the sale of real
estate, including the parties thereto;

            (iii)    All pending petitions for the release of
sureties;

          (iv) All pending petitions for the removal of
personal representatives.

     (d)    The court commissioner is bound to furnish:

            (i)    The record of all reports and accounts filed;
          (ii)    All claims against the estate pending for trial;

          (iii) All delinquencies of personal representatives
to discharge any duty in the manner or within the time required
by law or order of the court.

     2-2-202. Preparation and contents of probate docket;
distribution of copies; call of docket.

     (a) At least once every six (6) months, the clerk of the
district court in each county of the state shall make a docket
of all estates of deceased persons pending in his county which
shall include:

          (i)    Title of the estate;

          (ii) Date of letters testamentary or letters of
administration;

          (iii) Name or names of the executors or
administrators; and

          (iv)    The names of the attorneys of record.

     (b) As soon as the docket is made, one (1) copy shall be
furnished to the judge of the district court of his county and
one (1) copy shall be furnished upon request to each attorney of
record in the estates.

     (c) The judge of the district court in each county shall,
at least once every six (6) months, read the probate docket in
open court and shall make an order in each estate as he deems
necessary to expedite the progress and closing thereof.

     2-2-203.    Authority to approve bonds.

All bonds required by this act may be approved by the clerk of
the district court wherein they are required to be filed.

                        ARTICLE 3 - PROCEDURE

     2-2-301.    Contents of orders and decrees; recording.

Orders and decrees of the court in probate proceedings need not
recite the existence of facts or the performance of acts upon
which the jurisdiction of the court or judge may depend, but
need only contain the matters ordered or adjudged, except as
otherwise provided in this chapter. All orders, judgments and
decrees of the court shall be entered at length in the proper
journal of the court. When a judgment or decree is made setting
apart a homestead, confirming a sale, making a distribution of
real property, or determining any other matter affecting the
title to real property, a certified copy shall be recorded in
the office of the county clerk of the county in which the
property is situated.

     2-2-302.   Notice imparted from date of recording.

When it is provided in this chapter that any order or decree of
the court shall be recorded in the office of the county clerk,
notice is imparted to all persons from the time of recording.

     2-2-303.   Citations; requirements generally; contents.

     (a) Citations shall be directed to the person to be cited,
signed by the clerk, and issued under the seal of the court, and
shall contain:

          (i)   The title of the proceeding;

          (ii) A brief statement of the nature of the
proceeding; and

          (iii) A direction that the person cited appear at a
time and place specified.

     2-2-304.   Citations; issuance.

The citation may be issued by the clerk upon the application of
any party, without an order of the judge or commissioner, except
in cases in which an order is expressly required by the
provisions of this chapter.

     2-2-305.   Citations; service.

The citation shall be served in the same manner as a summons in
a civil action.

     2-2-306.   Citations; used to give personal notice.

When a personal notice is required, and no mode of giving it is
prescribed in this chapter, it shall be given by citation.
     2-2-307.   Citations; when to be served.

When no other time is specially prescribed in this chapter,
citations shall be served at least five (5) days before the
return day thereof.

     2-2-308. Provisions of Rules of Civil Procedure
applicable; parties.

Except as otherwise provided in the Probate Code, the provisions
of the Wyoming Rules of Civil Procedure are applicable to and
constitute the rules of practice for all proceedings, new trials
or appeals. In all proceedings the party affirming is contestant
and the one denying or avoiding is contestee.

     2-2-309.   Trial by court or jury.

If no jury is demanded, the court shall try the issues joined.
If, on written demand, a jury is called for by either party in a
matter triable under W.S. 2-2-308, one shall be had as in other
civil cases.

     2-2-310. Appointment of attorney for minors or
nonresidents; compensation; failure to appoint of no effect.

At or before the hearing of petitions and contests for the
probate of wills, for letters testamentary or of administration,
for sales of real estate and confirmation thereof, settlements,
partitions, and distribution of estates, setting apart
homesteads, and all other proceedings where all the parties
interested in the estate are required to be notified, the court
may appoint an attorney-at-law to represent the devisees,
legatees, heirs or creditors of the decedent who are minors and
have no general guardian in the county, or who are nonresidents
of the state, and those interested who, though they are neither
minors or nonresidents, are unrepresented. The order shall
specify the names of the parties, so far as known, for whom the
attorney is appointed. The attorney may receive a fee, to be
fixed by the court, for his services, which shall be paid out of
the funds of the estate as necessary expenses of administration,
and upon distribution may be charged to the party represented by
the attorney. If, for any cause, it becomes necessary, the court
may substitute another attorney for the one first appointed, in
which case the fee shall be proportionately divided. The failure
to appoint an attorney will not affect the validity of any of
the proceedings.
     2-2-311.   Payment of costs.

When it is not otherwise prescribed in this chapter, the
district court, or the supreme court on appeal, may order costs
to be paid by any party to the proceedings, or out of the assets
of the estate. Execution for the costs may issue out of the
court.

     2-2-312.   Service of process on guardian; right of guardian
to waive.

Whenever an infant or incompetent person has a guardian of his
estate residing in this state, personal service upon the
guardian of any process, notice or order of the court concerning
the estate of a deceased person in which the ward is interested
is equivalent to service upon the ward, and it is the duty of
the guardian to attend to the interests of the ward in the
matter. The guardian may also appear for his ward and waive any
process, notice or order to show cause which an adult or a
person of sound mind might waive.

                         ARTICLE 4 - FEES

     2-2-401.   Schedule; additional charges.

     (a) For probate matters filed or commenced, the clerk of
the district court shall collect fees as follows:

          (i)   Original filing fee      $110.00

          (ii) When an inventory or appraisement is filed
showing an estate or guardianship valued at five thousand
dollars ($5,000.00) or more, additional fees based upon value
shall be collected as follows:

               (A) Value five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) to
ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) $5.00

               (B) Each additional ten thousand dollars
($10,000.00) of value or portion thereof    $5.00

          (iii) In addition to the original filing fee under
paragraph (a)(i) of this subsection, a court automation fee in
the amount of forty dollars ($40.00) which shall be deposited
into the judicial systems automation account established by W.S.
5-2-120;
          (iv) In addition to the original filing fee under
paragraph (a)(i) of this subsection, an indigent civil legal
services fee in the amount of ten dollars ($10.00), which shall
be deposited into the indigent civil legal services account
established by W.S. 5-2-121.

     (b) The original filing fee shall cover the general filing
activity of the clerk's office and a certification of one (1)
copy of any order, decree or judgment at the time of its filing
for each party. Other copy charges and certification fees shall
be assessed at the same amount as established for other business
of the court.

     (c) Additional fees or charges may be assessed for
particular matters as ordered by the court.

     2-2-402.     Responsibility of clerk for collection;
distribution.

The clerk of the district court of each county is responsible
upon his bond for the collection or payment of any fees in
probate matters which are to be collected by him or when the
court orders fees to be paid to the clerk for fees not specially
provided for in W.S. 2-2-401. All of the fees shall be paid to
the county treasurer at the end of each month.

     2-2-403.     Allowance where not specially provided.

When there are no fees specially provided for the performance of
any duty under the Probate Code, reasonable fees may be ordered
and allowed as the court may deem best.

     2-2-404.     Payment of court commissioner.

     (a) The court commissioner, in performing the duties
prescribed by the Probate Code, shall receive the following fees
in full payment for all services, which shall be taxed as costs
against the estate:

          (i) For attending any matter, five dollars ($5.00)
per day for the time actually employed in hearing the matter;

           (ii)    For each order made by him, three dollars
($3.00);

          (iii) For all other services he shall receive the
same fees which clerks of courts receive for similar services.
                        CHAPTER 3 - FIDUCIARIES

                        ARTICLE 1 - IN GENERAL

     2-3-101.   Oath.

Before letters testamentary or of administration are issued, the
personal representative shall take and subscribe an oath before
some officer authorized to administer oaths, that he will
perform according to law the duties of executor or
administrator, which oath shall be attached to the letters.

     2-3-102. Bond required; sureties; form; amount;
ascertaining value of property.

Except as provided by W.S. 2-3-111, every person to whom letters
testamentary or of administration are issued shall, before
receiving them, execute a bond to the state of Wyoming with two
(2) or more sufficient individual sureties or one (1) sufficient
corporate surety approved by the district court or the
commissioner or clerk. The bond shall be joint and several and
the penalty shall not be less than the value of the personal
property, and the probable value of the annual rents, profits
and issues of real property belonging to the estate. The value
shall be ascertained by the district court or the above named
officers by examining on oath the party applying and any other
person. The sureties shall justify on written oath attached to
the bond in an amount equal in the aggregate to the penalty
thereof.

     2-3-103.   Letters and bonds to be recorded.

All letters testamentary or of administration issued to, and all
bonds executed by personal representatives, with the affidavits
and certificates thereon, shall be recorded by the clerk of the
court.

     2-3-104.   Appointment orders to state qualification time;
lapses.

Whenever an order appointing a personal representative is made
by any district court or officer having authority to make the
appointment, the order shall state the time within which the
personal representative shall qualify by giving the bond and
taking the oath required by law. Upon failure of any personal
representative to qualify within the time fixed, his appointment
shall lapse and another appointment shall be made.

     2-3-105. Additional bond required upon sale of real
estate; when required.

The district court may require an additional bond whenever the
sale of any real estate belonging to the estate is ordered,
unless it satisfactorily appears that the penalty of the bond
given before receiving letters or any bond given in place
thereof is equal to the value of the personal property remaining
with or that will come into the possession of the personal
representative, including the annual rents, profits and issues
of real estate, and the probable amount to be realized on the
sale of real estate ordered sold.

     2-3-106. Additional bond required upon sale of real
estate; conditions.

The additional bond shall be conditioned that the personal
representative shall faithfully execute the duties of the trust
according to law, and the sureties shall justify as provided in
W.S. 2-3-102.

     2-3-107. Separate bond required from each personal
representative.

When two (2) or more persons are appointed personal
representatives, a separate bond is required from each of them
in the same amount as would be required from one.

     2-3-108.   Several recoveries on same bond allowed.

The bond shall not be void upon the first recovery. It may be
used and recovered upon from time to time by any person
aggrieved, in his own name, until the whole penalty is
exhausted.

     2-3-109. Ordering sureties to appear for property value
examination; notice to personal representatives; requiring
additional security.

Before any bond is approved and after its approval, the officer
whose duty it is to approve the same, of his own motion or upon
the motion of any person interested in the estate, supported by
affidavit that the sureties or one (1) or more of them are not
worth as much as they have justified to, may order the sureties
to appear before him at a designated time and place to be
examined touching their property and its value. The officer
shall, at the same time, cause a notice to be issued to the
personal representative requiring his appearance at the
examination. If, upon examination of the sureties and the
witnesses who appear, the officer is satisfied that the bond is
insufficient, he shall require additional security.

     2-3-110.   When sufficient security not given in time.

If sufficient security is not given within the time fixed by the
order, the right of the personal representative to the
administration shall cease, and the person next entitled to the
administration of the estate, shall be appointed to the
administration upon execution of a sufficient bond.

     2-3-111.   When no bond required; generally.

     (a) When it is expressly provided in the will or by
statute that no bond be required of the personal representative
or when the distributees waive in writing the requirement that a
bond be executed, letters testamentary or of administration may
issue without the execution and filing of a bond as provided by
W.S. 2-3-102.

     (b) When a bond is waived by will, by statute or by the
distributees, sales of real estate may be made and confirmed
without a bond unless the court for good cause requires one to
be executed.

     (c) If it appears necessary for any reason at any time
afterward, the personal representative may be required to file a
bond as in other cases.

     2-3-112. When no bond required; suspension of powers upon
allegation of waste.

When a petition is presented praying that a personal
representative be required to give further security, or to give
bond, where by the terms of the will no bond was originally
required, and it is alleged on oath that the personal
representative is wasting the property of the estate, the judge
or commissioner may by order suspend his powers until the matter
can be heard and determined.

     2-3-113.   Requiring further security; petition.
Any person interested in any estate may, by verified petition,
represent to the court or commissioner that the sureties of a
personal representative have become or are becoming insolvent,
or that they have removed or are about to remove from the state,
or that from any other cause the bond is insufficient, and ask
that further security be required.

     2-3-114. Requiring further security; citation to personal
representative; service.

If the court or commissioner is satisfied that the matter
requires investigation, a citation shall be issued to the
personal representative requiring him to appear at a time and
place specified to show cause why he should not give further
security. The citation shall be served personally on the
personal representative at least five (5) days before the return
day. If he has absconded or cannot be found it may be served by
leaving a copy of it at his place of residence or by such
publication as may be ordered.

     2-3-115. Requiring further security; hearing; order
therefor or new bond.

At the time appointed the court shall hear the proofs and
allegations of the parties. If it satisfactorily appears that
the security is insufficient, an order may be made requiring the
personal representative to give further security, or to file a
new bond in the usual form within a reasonable time, not less
than five (5) days.

     2-3-116.   Requiring further security; failure to comply.

If the personal representative neglects to comply with the order
within the time prescribed, the court shall revoke his letters
and his authority shall cease.

     2-3-117.   Ordering further security without application.

When it comes to his knowledge that the bond of a personal
representative is insufficient, the court or commissioner,
without any application, shall cause him to be cited to appear
and show cause why he should not give further security, and
shall proceed as upon the application of any person interested.

     2-3-118.   Relief of sureties; application; citation and
service.
When a surety of any personal representative desires to be
released from responsibility on account of future acts, he may
apply to the court or commissioner for relief. Citation shall be
issued to the personal representative and served personally,
requiring him to appear at a time and place specified, and to
give other security. If he has absconded, left or removed from
the state or if he cannot be found after due diligence and
inquiry, service may be made as provided in W.S. 2-3-114.

     2-3-119.   Relief of sureties; release order.

If new sureties are given to the satisfaction of the court or
commissioner, he may order that the sureties who applied for
relief shall not be liable on their bond for any subsequent act,
default or misconduct of the personal representative.

     2-3-120.   Relief of sureties; revocation of letters.

If the personal representative neglects or refuses to give new
sureties to the satisfaction of the court or commissioner,
unless the surety making the application shall consent to a
longer extension of time, the court or commissioner shall by
order revoke his letters.

     2-3-121. Revoking intestacy administration if will later
allowed; generally.

If, after granting letters of administration on the ground of
intestacy, a will of the decedent is duly proved and allowed,
the letters of administration shall be revoked and the power of
the administrator shall cease, and he shall render an account of
his administration within the time directed.

     2-3-122. Revoking intestacy administration if will later
allowed; authority of personal representative.

In such case, the personal representative with the will annexed
is entitled to demand, sue for, recover and collect all the
rights, goods, chattels, debts and effects of the decedent
remaining unadministered. He may prosecute to final judgment any
suit commenced by the administrator before the revocation of his
letters of administration.

     2-3-123. Remaining personal representatives to continue if
one disqualified.
If any one (1) of several personal representatives to whom
letters are granted dies, becomes incompetent, is convicted of
an infamous crime or otherwise becomes incapable of executing
the trust, or if letters testamentary or of administration are
revoked or annulled with respect to any one (1) personal
representative, the remaining personal representative shall
complete the execution of the will or administration.

     2-3-124. New appointment to be made if all personal
representatives die; bond; authority.

If all personal representatives die or become incapable, or the
authority of all of them is revoked, letters testamentary or
letters of administration then shall be issued in the same order
of preference and manner as provided for the issuance of
original letters testamentary or original letters of
administration. The personal representative so appointed shall
give bond in like penalty, with like sureties and conditions as
required of personal representatives, and shall have like
authority.

     2-3-125. Resignation of personal representative;
revocation of letters for delay or other cause and new
appointment; liability after discharge.

Any personal representative may, by writing filed in the
district court, resign his appointment at any time, having first
settled his accounts and delivered up all the estate to the
person appointed to receive the same. If by reason of any delays
in such settlement and delivery of the estate or for any other
cause the circumstances of the estate or the rights of those
interested therein require it, the court may, before settlement
of accounts and delivering up of the estate is completed, revoke
the letters of the personal representative, and appoint another
personal representative, either special or general, in the same
manner as for original letters of administration. The personal
representative discharged and released, and the sureties on his
bonds are not responsible for any act or liability incurred
after his discharge, but shall not be relieved of any liability
occurring on his bonds prior to his discharge.

     2-3-126.   Acts valid until power revoked.

All acts of a personal representative before the revocation of
his letters testamentary or of administration are as valid as if
the personal representative had continued lawfully to execute
the duties of his trust.
     2-3-127. Suspension of personal representative's powers
for waste; order.

Whenever the court, commissioner or clerk of court has reason to
believe from his own knowledge or from credible information that
any personal representative has wasted, embezzled or mismanaged,
or is about to waste or embezzle the property of the estate
committed to his charge, or has committed or is about to commit
a fraud upon the estate, is incompetent to act, has permanently
removed from the state, has wrongfully neglected the estate, or
has long neglected to perform any act as personal
representative, he shall by order suspend the powers of the
personal representative until the matter is investigated.

     2-3-128. Suspension of personal representative's powers
for waste; notice to show cause.

When suspension is ordered, the personal representative shall be
cited to appear and show cause why his letters should not be
revoked. If he fails to appear or if upon appearance the court
or officer is satisfied there exists cause for his removal, his
letters shall be revoked and letters of administration granted
anew as the case may require.

     2-3-129. Suspension of personal representative's powers
for waste; hearing and determination.

At the hearing any person interested in the estate or the
officer making the charge may appear and file his allegations in
writing, showing that the personal representative should be
removed. The personal representative may answer. The issue
raised shall be heard and determined by the court.

     2-3-130. Suspension of personal representative's powers
for waste; notice by publication.

If the personal representative has absconded, conceals himself
or has absented himself from the state, notice by publication
may be given him of the pendency of the proceedings.

     2-3-131. Suspension of personal representative's powers
for waste; compelling attendance and answers.

In the proceedings for the removal of a personal representative,
the court may compel his attendance by attachment, and may
compel him to answer questions on oath touching his
administration. Upon his refusal, the court may commit him until
he obeys, revoke his letters, or both.

     2-3-132.   Petition for revocation by prior claimant;
generally.

When letters of administration are granted to any person other
than the surviving husband or wife, child, father, mother,
brother or sister of the intestate, any one (1) of them who is
competent, or any competent person at the written request of any
one (1) of them, may obtain the revocation of the letters and be
entitled to administration by presenting to the court a petition
so praying.

     2-3-133. Petition for revocation by prior claimant;
citation to personal representative.

When such petition is filed, the clerk shall issue a citation to
the personal representative to appear and answer at the time
appointed for the hearing.

     2-3-134. Petition for revocation by prior claimant;
hearing and disposition.

At the time appointed, the citation having been duly served and
returned, the court shall proceed to hear the allegations and
proofs of the parties. If the right of the applicant is
established and he is competent, letters of administration shall
be granted to him and the letters of the former personal
representative revoked.

     2-3-135. Petition for revocation by prior claimant; prior
right of surviving spouse.

When letters of administration have been granted to a child,
father, brother or sister of the intestate, the surviving spouse
may assert his or her prior right and obtain letters of
administration and have the letters before granted revoked.

     2-3-136. Hearing upon affidavit of interested person;
authority to order.

When it appears by the affidavit of any person interested in the
estate that any personal representative, guardian, receiver,
assignee or trustee has failed to render his accounts in the
manner prescribed by law or as required by the order of the
court, or has removed from the state, the court may order a
hearing as hereinafter prescribed.

     2-3-137. Hearing upon affidavit of interested person;
citation and service thereof.

The court shall make an order fixing the time and place of the
hearing. The clerk shall issue citation to be served upon the
officer charged as delinquent and upon the heirs, ward, cestui
que trust or bondsmen. The citation shall be served by the
sheriff upon the person or persons to be served, or by
registered mail if personal service cannot be made in the
county. The citation shall notify the persons served of the time
and place of the hearing.

     2-3-138. Hearing upon affidavit of interested person;
proceedings and disposition.

At the hearing the court shall proceed in a summary way to
ascertain the facts and the course best calculated to protect
the interests of all parties. Upon finding of default or removal
from the state, the court may remove the personal
representative, guardian, receiver, assignee or trustee and
appoint another qualified person to administer the estate, who
shall qualify according to law.

                  ARTICLE 2 - UNIFORM PROVISIONS

     2-3-201.   Short title.

W.S. 2-3-201 through 2-3-211 may be cited as the "Uniform
Fiduciaries Act".

     2-3-202.   Definitions.

     (a) In this act unless the context or subject matter
otherwise requires:

          (i) "Bank" includes any person or association of
persons, whether incorporated or not, carrying on the business
of banking;

          (ii) "Fiduciary" includes a trustee under any trust,
expressed, implied, resulting or constructive, personal
representative, guardian, conservator, curator, receiver,
trustee in bankruptcy, assignee for the benefit of creditors,
partner, agent, officer of a corporation, public or private,
public officer or any other person acting in a fiduciary
capacity for any person, trust or estate;

          (iii) "Person" includes a corporation, partnership or
other association or two (2) or more persons having a joint or
common interest;

          (iv) "Principal" includes any person to whom a
fiduciary as such owes an obligation;

          (v) A thing is done "in good faith" within the
meaning of this act, when it is in fact done honestly, whether
it be done negligently or not;

          (vi) As used in the Uniform Fiduciaries Act, "this
act" means W.S. 2-3-201 through 2-3-211.

     2-3-203.   Responsibility and rights of persons dealing with
fiduciaries.

A person who in good faith pays or transfers to a fiduciary any
money or other property which the fiduciary as such is
authorized to receive is not responsible for the proper
application thereof by the fiduciary; and any right or title
acquired from the fiduciary in consideration of the payment or
transfer is not invalid in consequence of a misapplication by
the fiduciary.

     2-3-204.   Liability of bank; payment of checks signed by
fiduciary.

If a deposit is made in a bank to the credit of a fiduciary as
such, the bank is authorized to pay the amount of the deposit or
any part thereof upon the check of the fiduciary, signed with
the name in which such deposit is entered, without being liable
to the principal, unless the bank pays the check with actual
knowledge that the fiduciary is committing a breach of his
obligation as fiduciary in drawing the check or with knowledge
that its action in paying the check amounts to bad faith. If a
check is payable to the drawee bank and is delivered to it in
payment of or as security for a personal debt of the fiduciary
to it, the bank is liable to the principal if the fiduciary in
fact commits a breach of his obligation as fiduciary in drawing
or delivering the check.

     2-3-205.   Liability of bank; when check drawn on principal
by fiduciary.
If a check is drawn upon the account of his principal in a bank
by a fiduciary who is empowered to draw checks upon his
principal's account, the bank is authorized to pay the check
without being liable to the principal, unless the bank pays the
check with actual knowledge that the fiduciary is committing a
breach of his obligation as fiduciary in drawing the check, or
with knowledge that its action in paying the check amounts to
bad faith. If a check is payable to the drawee bank and is
delivered to it in payment of or as security for a personal debt
of the fiduciary to it, the bank is liable to the principal if
the fiduciary in fact commits a breach of his obligation as
fiduciary in drawing or delivering the check.

     2-3-206.   Liability of bank; receiving deposit from
fiduciary.

If a fiduciary makes a deposit in a bank to his personal credit
of checks drawn by him upon an account in his own name as
fiduciary, or of checks payable to him as fiduciary, or of
checks drawn by him upon an account in the name of his principal
if he is empowered to draw checks thereon, or of checks payable
to his principal and endorsed by him, if he is empowered to
endorse the checks, or if he otherwise makes a deposit of funds
held by him as fiduciary, the bank receiving the deposit is not
bound to inquire whether the fiduciary is committing thereby a
breach of his obligation as fiduciary; and the bank is
authorized to pay the amount of the deposit or any part thereof
upon the personal check of the fiduciary without being liable to
the principal, unless the bank receives the deposit or pays the
check with actual knowledge that the fiduciary is committing a
breach of his obligation as fiduciary in making the deposit or
in drawing the check, or with knowledge that its action in
receiving the deposit or paying the check amounts to bad faith.

     2-3-207.   Liability of bank; when check drawn by trustee.

When a deposit is made in a bank in the name of two (2) or more
persons as trustees and a check is drawn upon the trust account
by any trustee or trustees authorized by the other trustee or
trustees to draw checks upon the trust account, neither the
payee nor other holder nor the bank is bound to inquire whether
it is a breach of trust to authorize the trustee or trustees to
draw checks upon the trust account, and is not liable unless the
circumstances are such that the action of the payee or other
holder or the bank amounts to bad faith.
     2-3-208. Succession of fiduciary powers when bank
consolidates with another.

In the event of the merger or the consolidation of any bank,
banking association, loan and trust company, named as personal
representative, trustee under trust agreement, guardian of
minors or incompetents, trustee for bond issue, escrow agent,
holder of real estate titles, receiver or agent, the successor
of the bank, banking association, or loan and trust company,
shall by virtue of the merger, consolidation or succession,
succeed to all the fiduciary powers, privileges, benefits,
obligations, duties and liabilities of its predecessor, and
shall carry out all the duties and obligations imposed upon its
predecessor as the personal representative, trustee under trust
agreement, guardian of minors or incompetents, trustee for bond
issue, escrow agent, holder of real estate titles, receiver or
agent, as if it had been originally named in the instrument or
instruments creating the fiduciary relation.

     2-3-209.   Applicability; generally.

The provisions of this act shall not apply to transactions
taking place prior to the time when it takes effect.

     2-3-210.   Applicability; rules of law and equity.

In any case not provided for in this act, the rules of law and
equity, including the law merchant and those rules of law and
equity relating to trusts, agency, negotiable instruments and
banking, shall continue to apply.

     2-3-211.   Interpretation and construction.

This act shall be so interpreted and construed as to effectuate
its general purpose to make uniform the law of those states
which enact it.

        ARTICLE 3 - HANDLING OF PROPERTY AND INVESTMENTS

     2-3-301. Standard for fiduciaries; authority to acquire
and retain property and investments.

     (a) In acquiring, investing, reinvesting, exchanging,
retaining, selling and managing property for the benefit of
another, a fiduciary shall exercise the judgment and care of a
prudent investor as specified under W.S. 4-10-901 through
4-10-913.
     (b) Within the limitations of the foregoing standard, a
fiduciary may:

          (i) Acquire and retain every kind of property, real,
personal or mixed, and every kind of investment, specifically
including bonds, debentures and other corporate obligations, and
stocks, preferred or common, which persons of prudence,
discretion and intelligence acquire or retain for their own
account;

          (ii) Retain property properly acquired, without
limitation as to time and without regard to its suitability for
original purchase.

     (c) Any bank as defined by W.S. 13-1-101 or any trust
company formed under W.S. 13-5-102, that is acting as a
fiduciary or agent may, in its discretion or at the direction of
another person who is authorized to direct the investment of
money held by the bank or trust company, invest in the
securities of an open end or closed end management investment
company or investment trust that is registered under the federal
Investment Company Act of 1940, as amended. The bank or trust
company, or any affiliate thereof, may provide services to the
investment trust or investment company, including acting as an
investment advisor, manager, sponsor, distributor, custodian,
transfer agent or registrar, and may receive reasonable
compensation for the services. Provided, however, that with
respect to any funds invested, the bank or trust company or its
affiliate shall disclose to the persons to whom statements of
the account are rendered consistent with the requirements of
W.S. 4-10-802(f).

     2-3-302. Departures from express terms of wills not
authorized; "legal investment" or "authorized investment"
construed.

Nothing contained in W.S. 2-3-301 through 2-3-305 shall be
construed as authorizing any departure from, or variation of,
the express terms or limitations set forth in any will,
agreement, court order or other instrument creating or defining
the fiduciary's duties and powers, but the terms "legal
investment" or "authorized investment" or words of similar
import, as used in any instrument, shall be taken to mean any
investment which is permitted by the terms of W.S. 2-3-301.

     2-3-303.   Authority of court to allow deviation from terms.
Nothing contained in this act shall be construed as restricting
the power of a court of proper jurisdiction to permit a
fiduciary to deviate from the terms of any will, agreement or
other instrument relating to the acquisition, investment,
reinvestment, exchange, retention, sale or management of
fiduciary property.

     2-3-304.    Applicability; generally.

The provisions of this act shall govern fiduciaries acting under
wills, agreements, court orders and other instruments now
existing or hereafter made.

     2-3-305.    Applicability; state funds excepted.

Nothing contained in this act shall apply to any funds belonging
to the state of Wyoming.

                       ARTICLE 4 - TRUST FUNDS

     2-3-401.    Short title.

W.S. 2-3-401 through 2-3-403 may be cited as the "Uniform Common
Trust Fund Act".

     2-3-402.    Authority to establish; purpose.

     (a) Any bank or trust company qualified to act as
fiduciary in this state may establish and administer common
trust funds composed of property permitted by law for investment
in trust funds for the purpose of furnishing investments to:

          (i)    Itself as fiduciary;

          (ii)    Itself and others as cofiduciaries;

          (iii) Any affiliated bank or trust company including
any foreign affiliated bank or trust company as fiduciary;

          (iv) Any affiliated bank or trust company including
any foreign affiliated bank or trust company and others as
cofiduciaries; or

          (v) Any combination of the entities listed in
paragraphs  (i) through (iv) of this subsection.
     (b) Any bank or trust company may as fiduciary or
cofiduciary invest funds which it lawfully holds for investment
in interests in common trust funds administered by itself or by
any affiliated bank or trust company, if such investment is not
prohibited by the instrument, judgment, decree, order, or
statute creating or governing the fiduciary relationship, and
if, in the case of a cofiduciary, the bank or trust company
procures the consent of its cofiduciary in such investment.

     2-3-403.   Accounting.

Unless ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction, the bank or
trust company operating common trust funds is not required to
render a court accounting with regard to these funds, but it may
by application to the court secure approval of an accounting on
such conditions as the court may establish.

     2-3-404.   Common trust fund distinct from participating
fiduciaries.

     (a) Each common trust fund established hereunder is a
separate and distinct entity from the fiduciaries participating
in the fund. No fiduciary in administering its and other
fiduciaries participation in a common trust fund may be required
to make any apportionment or allocation between the principal
and income of the fund between the participating fiduciaries
different from that made for the common trust fund.

     (b) No fiduciary participating in a common trust fund, or
person having an interest in property invested in the common
trust fund, may have or be considered to have any ownership in
any particular property of the common trust fund. Each
participating fiduciary shall have a proportionate undivided
interest in the fund and its income. The ownership of all
property of the common trust fund shall be in the trustee of the
fund.

     2-3-405.   "Affiliated" defined.

For purposes of this article, two (2) or more banks or trust
companies are affiliated if they are members of the same
affiliated group, within the meaning of section 1504 of the
United States Internal Revenue Code.

     2-3-406.   Exemption.
The establishment and maintenance of common trust funds under
this article are exempt from the provisions of title 17, chapter
4.

                ARTICLE 5 - MORTGAGE, LEASE OR SALE

     2-3-501.   Authorization by court; generally.

Whenever in any estate or guardianship now being administered or
that may hereafter be administered, it appears to the court to
be for the advantage of the estate or ward to raise money upon a
note or notes secured by a mortgage of the real or personal
property of any decedent or ward or to make a lease of such real
property, or it appears to the court that the homestead of a
minor or incompetent is mortgaged and the mortgage thereon is
subject to foreclosure, and the guardian does not have
sufficient money in the estate of the person to pay the
mortgage, the court may as often as occasion therefor shall
arise in the administration of the estate or guardianship, on
petition, notice and hearing as provided in this article,
authorize and direct the executor, administrator or guardian to
mortgage the personal or real property, including release and
waiver of homestead of the ward, and to execute a note or notes
secured by the mortgage, or to lease the real estate, or any
part thereof.

     2-3-502. Authorization by court; contents of petition;
hearing; objections; terms, etc., of order.

     (a) A petition to mortgage or lease under W.S. 2-3-501, or
a petition to transfer, sell or assign royalty, overriding
royalty, leasehold or other mineral interest, or to lease the
mineral interest in the property under W.S. 2-3-503, shall show:

          (i) The advantage that may accrue to the estate from
the lease, mortgage, transfer, sale or assignment;

          (ii) A general description of the property to be
leased, mortgaged, sold or assigned;

          (iii) The term, rental and general conditions of the
proposed lease, transfer, sale or assignment, or the amount,
maturity and rate of interest of the proposed mortgage;

          (iv) The names of the legatees and devisees, if any,
and of the heirs of the deceased, or of the minor or incompetent
person, lessee, assignee or purchaser, so far as known to the
petitioner.

     (b) Upon the filing of the petition, the court, if it
deems the petition sufficient, shall set the matter for hearing
and shall direct to what persons and in what manner notice of
the hearing shall be given. At the hearing any person interested
in the estate may appear and present objections to the proposed
lease, mortgage, sale or assignment. If objections are filed to
the petition, the court may adjourn the hearing to enable the
parties objecting to fully present their reasons and evidence
for and against the proposed lease, mortgage, sale or
assignment. If no objections are filed, or if upon hearing the
objections are deemed insufficient, the court may order the
lease, mortgage, transfer, sale or assignment of royalty,
overriding royalty, lease or other mineral interest, or lease of
the mineral interest in the property, upon the terms, in the
amount and for the period as is deemed proper by the court.

     2-3-503. Authorization by court; transfer of mineral
interests; terms.

Proceedings may be had in the district court of each Wyoming
county in which an estate in probate is being administered or a
guardianship proceeding is pending, which involves real
property, for authority to transfer, sell or assign royalty,
overriding royalty, leasehold or other mineral interest and to
lease the mineral content ownership interest in the property of
any then deceased person or of any then minor or incompetent
person, as distinguished from realty surface leases referred to
in W.S. 2-3-501. If it appears to the court that the transfer,
sale or assignment of royalty, overriding royalty, leasehold or
other mineral interest or execution and delivery of a lease or
contract for exploration and development of the affected real
property mineral interest of the decedent, minor or incompetent
person, will be advantageous to the estate of the decedent,
minor or incompetent person the court, may authorize and direct
the trustee, executor or administrator of the probate estate or
the guardian of the estate of the minor or incompetent person,
to transfer, sell or assign the royalty, overriding royalty,
leasehold or other mineral interest or to lease the real estate
interest or any part thereof for the mineral content purposes
stated. Leases may be for primary terms of five (5) years or
less as mutually agreed by the parties thereto and for so long
thereafter as the mineral content, including but not restricted
to oil, gas or other hydrocarbons, shall or can be produced in
commercial quantities from the leasehold premises, or for the
term of each unit or cooperative agreement to which the lease
may be committed with the consent and approval of the court. The
lease is not invalid or voidable because its effectiveness may
or will extend beyond the term in office of the lessor, trustee,
executor, administrator or guardian, or beyond the time of final
settlement of the probate estate, or beyond the minority of the
minor or the period of incompetency of the incompetent involved.
With the consent and approval of the court any royalty,
overriding royalty or other mineral interest or a lease may be
committed to a unit or cooperative agreement, or to a secondary
recovery agreement, for a like term and with like effect.

     2-3-504. Authorization by court; transfer of mineral
interests; prior leases validated.

All proceedings of the type herein authorized, which have been
heretofore concluded in any court aforesaid, substantially
consistent with the procedure herein authorized, and all
unexpired leases of the kind specified, previously executed and
delivered pursuant to each prior proceeding, substantially in
conformity with the provisions hereof, are hereby declared
valid, as effectively as if this act had been in force upon the
date of each prior proceeding and lease.

                 ARTICLE 6 - PRINCIPAL AND INCOME

     2-3-601.   Repealed By Laws 2001, Ch. 11, § 2.

     2-3-602.   Repealed By Laws 2001, Ch. 11, § 2.

     2-3-603.   Repealed By Laws 2001, Ch. 11, § 2.

     2-3-604.   Repealed By Laws 2001, Ch. 11, § 2.

     2-3-605.   Repealed By Laws 2001, Ch. 11, § 2.

     2-3-606.   Repealed By Laws 2001, Ch. 11, § 2.

     2-3-607.   Repealed By Laws 2001, Ch. 11, § 2.

     2-3-608.   Repealed By Laws 2001, Ch. 11, § 2.

     2-3-609.   Repealed By Laws 2001, Ch. 11, §2.

     2-3-610.   Repealed By Laws 2001, Ch. 11, § 2.

     2-3-611.   Repealed By Laws 2001, Ch. 11, § 2.
     2-3-612.   Repealed By Laws 2001, Ch. 11, § 2.

     2-3-613.   Repealed By Laws 2001, Ch. 11, § 2.

     2-3-614.   Repealed By Laws 2001, Ch. 11, § 2.

                  ARTICLE 7 - SECURITY TRANSFERS

     2-3-701.   Repealed By Laws 1996, ch. 65, § 4.

     2-3-702.   Repealed By Laws 1996, ch. 65, § 4.

     2-3-703.   Repealed By Laws 1996, ch. 65, § 4.

     2-3-704.   Repealed By Laws 1996, ch. 65, § 4.

     2-3-705.   Repealed By Laws 1996, ch. 65, § 4.

     2-3-706.   Repealed By Laws 1996, ch. 65, § 4.

     2-3-707.   Repealed By Laws 1996, ch. 65, § 4.

     2-3-708.   Repealed By Laws 1996, ch. 65, § 4.

     2-3-709.   Repealed By Laws 1996, ch. 65, § 4.

     2-3-710.   Repealed By Laws 1996, ch. 65, § 4.

     2-3-711.   Repealed By Laws 1996, ch. 65, § 4.

                 ARTICLE 8 - PRINCIPAL AND INCOME

     2-3-801.   Short title.

This act shall be known and may be cited as the "Wyoming Uniform
Principal and Income Act".

     2-3-802.   Definitions.

     (a)   As used in this act:

          (i) "Accounting period" means a calendar year unless
another twelve-month period is selected by a fiduciary. The term
includes a portion of a calendar year or other twelve-month
period that begins when an income interest begins or ends when
an income interest ends;
          (ii) "Beneficiary" includes, in the case of a
decedent's estate, an heir, legatee and devisee and, in the case
of a trust, an income beneficiary and a remainder beneficiary;

          (iii) "Fiduciary" means a personal representative or
a trustee. The term includes an executor, administrator,
successor personal representative, special administrator and a
person performing substantially the same function;

          (iv) "Income" means money or property that a
fiduciary receives as current return from a principal asset. The
term includes a portion of receipts from a sale, exchange or
liquidation of a principal asset, to the extent provided in W.S.
2-3-811 through 2-3-825;

          (v) "Income beneficiary" means a person to whom net
income of a trust is or may be payable;

          (vi) "Income interest" means the right of an income
beneficiary to receive all or part of net income, whether the
terms of the trust require it to be distributed or authorize it
to be distributed in the trustee's discretion;

          (vii) "Mandatory income interest" means the right of
an income beneficiary to receive net income that the terms of
the trust require the fiduciary to distribute;

          (viii) "Net income" means the total receipts
allocated to income during an accounting period minus the
disbursements made from income during the period, plus or minus
transfers under this act to or from income during the period;

          (ix) "Person" means an individual, corporation,
business trust, estate, trust, partnership, limited liability
company, association, joint venture; government, governmental
subdivision, agency or instrumentality; public corporation; or
any other legal or commercial entity;

          (x) "Principal" means property held in trust for
distribution to a remainder beneficiary when the trust
terminates;

          (xi) "Remainder beneficiary" means a person entitled
to receive principal when an income interest ends;
          (xii) "Terms of a trust" means the manifestation of
the intent of a settlor or decedent with respect to the trust,
expressed in a manner that admits of its proof in a judicial
proceeding, whether by written or spoken words or by conduct;

          (xiii) "Trustee" includes an original, additional or
successor trustee, whether or not appointed or confirmed by a
court;

          (xiv)   "This act" means W.S. 2-3-801 through 2-3-834.

     2-3-803.   Fiduciary duties; general principles.

     (a) In allocating receipts and disbursements to or between
principal and income, and with respect to any matter within the
scope of W.S. 2-3-806 through 2-3-810, a fiduciary:

          (i) Shall administer a trust or estate in accordance
with the terms of the trust or the will, even if there is a
different provision in this act;

          (ii) May administer a trust or estate by the exercise
of a discretionary power of administration given to the
fiduciary by the terms of the trust or the will, even if the
exercise of the power produces a result different from a result
required or permitted by this act, and no inference that the
fiduciary has improperly exercised the discretion arises from
the fact that the fiduciary has made an allocation contrary to a
provision of this act;

          (iii) Shall administer a trust or estate in
accordance with this act if the terms of the trust or the will
do not contain a different provision or do not give the
fiduciary a discretionary power of administration; and

          (iv) Shall add a receipt or charge a disbursement to
principal to the extent that the terms of the trust and this act
do not provide a rule for allocating the receipt or disbursement
to or between principal and income.

     (b) In exercising the power to adjust under W.S.
2-3-804(a) or a discretionary power of administration regarding
a matter within the scope of this act, whether granted by the
terms of a trust, a will, or this act, a fiduciary shall
administer a trust or estate impartially, based on what is fair
and reasonable to all of the beneficiaries, except to the extent
that the terms of the trust or the will clearly manifest an
intention that the fiduciary shall or may favor one (1) or more
of the beneficiaries. A determination in accordance with this
act is presumed to be fair and reasonable to all of the
beneficiaries.

     2-3-804.    Trustee's power to adjust; liability of trustee.

     (a) Subject to subsections (b) and (c) of this section, a
trustee may adjust between principal and income to the extent
the trustee considers necessary if the trustee invests and
manages trust assets as a prudent investor, the terms of the
trust describe the amount that may or must be distributed to a
beneficiary by referring to the trust's income, and the trustee
determines, after applying the rules in W.S. 2-3-803(a), and
considering any power the trustee may have under the trust to
invade principal or accumulate income, that the trustee is
unable to comply with W.S. 2-3-803(b).

     (b) In deciding whether and to what extent to exercise the
power conferred by subsection (a) of this section, a trustee
shall consider all factors relevant to the trust and its
beneficiaries, including the following factors to the extent
they are relevant:

          (i)    The nature, purpose and expected duration of the
trust;

          (ii)    The intent of the settlor;

          (iii)    The identity and circumstances of the
beneficiaries;

          (iv) The needs for liquidity, regularity of income
and preservation and appreciation of capital;

          (v) The assets held in the trust; the extent to which
they consist of financial assets, interests in closely held
enterprises, tangible and intangible personal property, or real
property; the extent to which an asset is used by a beneficiary;
and whether an asset was purchased by the trustee or received
from the settlor;

          (vi) The net amount allocated to income under the
other sections of this act and the increase or decrease in the
value of the principal assets, which the trustee may estimate as
to assets for which market values are not readily available;
          (vii) Whether and to what extent the terms of the
trust give the trustee the power to invade principal or
accumulate income or prohibit the trustee from invading
principal or accumulating income, and the extent to which the
trustee has exercised a power from time to time to invade
principal or accumulate income;

          (viii) The actual and anticipated effect of economic
conditions on principal and income and effects of inflation and
deflation; and

          (ix)   The anticipated tax consequences of an
adjustment.

     (c)   A trustee may not make an adjustment:

          (i) That diminishes the income interest in a trust
that requires all of the income to be paid at least annually to
a spouse and for which an estate tax or gift tax marital
deduction would be allowed, in whole or in part, if the trustee
did not have the power to make the adjustment;

          (ii) That reduces the actuarial value of the income
interest in a trust to which a person transfers property with
the intent to qualify for a gift tax exclusion;

          (iii) That changes the amount payable to a
beneficiary as a fixed annuity or a fixed fraction of the value
of the trust assets;

          (iv) From any amount that is permanently set aside
for charitable purposes under a will or the terms of a trust
unless both income and principal are so set aside;

          (v) If possessing or exercising the power to make an
adjustment causes an individual to be treated as the owner of
all or part of the trust for income tax purposes, and the
individual would not be treated as the owner if the trustee did
not possess the power to make an adjustment;

          (vi) If possessing or exercising the power to make an
adjustment causes all or part of the trust assets to be included
for estate tax purposes in the estate of an individual who has
the power to remove a trustee or appoint a trustee, or both, and
the assets would not be included in the estate of the individual
if the trustee did not possess the power to make an adjustment;
          (vii)   If the trustee is a beneficiary of the trust;
or

          (viii) If the trustee is not a beneficiary, but the
adjustment would benefit the trustee directly or indirectly.

     (d) If paragraph (c)(v), (vi), (vii) or (viii) of this
section applies to a trustee and there is more than one (1)
trustee, a cotrustee to whom the provision does not apply may
make the adjustment unless the exercise of the power by the
remaining trustee or trustees is not permitted by the terms of
the trust.

     (e) A trustee may release the entire power conferred by
subsection (a) of this section or may release only the power to
adjust from income to principal or the power to adjust from
principal to income if the trustee is uncertain about whether
possessing or exercising the power will cause a result described
in paragraphs (c)(i) through (vi) or (viii) of this section or
if the trustee determines that possessing or exercising the
power will or may deprive the trust of a tax benefit or impose a
tax burden not described in subsection (c) of this section. The
release may be permanent or for a specified period, including a
period measured by the life of an individual.

     (f) Terms of a trust that limit the power of a trustee to
make an adjustment between principal and income do not affect
the application of this section unless it is clear from the
terms of the trust that the terms are intended to deny the
trustee the power of adjustment conferred by subsection (a) of
this section.

     (g) Nothing in this section or in this act is intended to
create or imply a duty to make an adjustment, and a trustee is
not liable for not considering whether to make an adjustment or
for choosing not to make an adjustment.

     (h) If a trustee elects to exercise the power to adjust
under this statute, the trustee may, on an annual basis, include
net realized capital gains in determining trust income and
section 643(a) of the Internal Revenue Code distributable net
income, if the allocation is reasonable and impartial.

     2-3-805. Notice of proposed action; objections of
beneficiary; liability of trustee; proceedings.
     (a) Unless a trust instrument requires otherwise, a
trustee may give notice of proposed action regarding a matter
governed by this act as provided in this section. For the
purpose of this section, a proposed action includes a course of
action and a decision not to take action.

     (b) If a trustee elects to give notice under this section,
the trustee shall mail notice of the proposed action to all
beneficiaries who are receiving, or are entitled to receive,
income under the trust or to receive a distribution of principal
if the trust were terminated at the time the notice is given.

     (c) Notice of proposed action need not be given to any
person who consents in writing to the proposed action. The
consent may be executed at any time before or after the proposed
action is taken.

     (d) The notice of proposed action shall state that it is
given pursuant to this section and shall state all of the
following:

          (i)   The name and mailing address of the trustee;

          (ii) The name and telephone number of a person who
may be contacted for additional information;

          (iii) A description of the action proposed to be
taken and an explanation of the reasons for the action;

          (iv) The time within which objections to the proposed
action can be made, which shall be at least thirty (30) days
from the mailing of the notice of proposed action; and

          (v) The date on or after which the proposed action
may be taken or is effective.

     (e) A beneficiary may object to the proposed action by
mailing a written objection to the trustee at the address stated
in the notice of proposed action within the time period
specified in the notice of proposed action.

     (f) Except for good cause shown, a trustee is not liable
to a beneficiary for an action regarding a matter governed by
this act if the trustee does not receive a written objection to
the proposed action from the beneficiary within the applicable
period and the other requirements of this section are satisfied.
If no beneficiary entitled to notice objects under this section,
the trustee is not liable to any current or future beneficiary
with respect to the proposed action.

     (g) If the trustee receives a written objection within the
applicable period, either the trustee or a beneficiary may
petition the court to have the proposed action taken as
proposed, taken with modifications, or denied. In the
proceeding, a beneficiary objecting to the proposed action has
the burden of proving that the trustee's proposed action should
not be taken. A beneficiary who has not objected is not estopped
from opposing the proposed action in the proceeding. If the
trustee decides not to implement the proposed action, the
trustee shall notify the beneficiaries of the decision not to
take the action and the reasons for the decision, and the
trustee's decision not to implement the proposed action does not
itself give rise to liability to any current or future
beneficiary. A beneficiary may petition the court to have the
action taken, and has the burden of proving that it should be
taken.

     2-3-806.   Determination and distribution of net income.

     (a) After a decedent dies, in the case of an estate, or
after an income interest in a trust ends, the following rules
apply:

          (i) A fiduciary of an estate or of a terminating
income interest shall determine the amount of net income and net
principal receipts received from property specifically given to
a beneficiary under the rules in W.S. 2-3-808 through 2-3-831
which apply to trustees and the rules in paragraph (v) of this
subsection. The fiduciary shall distribute the net income and
net principal receipts to the beneficiary who is to receive the
specific property;

          (ii) A fiduciary shall determine the remaining net
income of a decedent's estate or a terminating income interest
under the rules in W.S. 2-3-808 through 2-3-831 which apply to
trustees and by:

               (A) Including in net income all income from
property used to discharge liabilities;

               (B) Paying from income or principal, in the
fiduciary's discretion, fees of attorneys, accountants and
fiduciaries; court costs and other expenses of administration;
and interest on death taxes, but the fiduciary may pay those
expenses from income of property passing to a trust for which
the fiduciary claims an estate tax marital or charitable
deduction only to the extent that the payment of those expenses
from income will not cause the reduction or loss of the
deduction; and

               (C) Paying from principal all other
disbursements made or incurred in connection with the settlement
of a decedent's estate or the winding up of a terminating income
interest, including debts, funeral expenses, disposition of
remains, family allowances and death taxes and related penalties
that are apportioned to the estate or terminating income
interest by the will, the terms of the trust or applicable law.

          (iii) A fiduciary shall distribute to a beneficiary
who receives a pecuniary amount outright the interest or any
other amount provided by the will, the terms of the trust, or
applicable law from net income determined under paragraph (ii)
of this subsection or from principal to the extent that net
income is insufficient. If a beneficiary is to receive a
pecuniary amount outright from a trust after an income interest
ends and no interest or other amount is provided for by the
terms of the trust or applicable law, the fiduciary shall
distribute the interest or other amount to which the beneficiary
would be entitled under applicable law if the pecuniary amount
were required to be paid under a will;

          (iv) A fiduciary shall distribute the net income
remaining after distributions required by paragraph (iii) of
this subsection in the manner described in W.S. 2-3-807 to all
other beneficiaries, including a beneficiary who receives a
pecuniary amount in trust, even if the beneficiary holds an
unqualified power to withdraw assets from the trust or other
presently exercisable general power of appointment over the
trust;

          (v) A fiduciary may not reduce principal or income
receipts from property described in paragraph (i) of this
subsection because of a payment described in W.S. 2-3-826 or
2-3-827 to the extent that the will, the terms of the trust, or
applicable law requires the fiduciary to make the payment from
assets other than the property or to the extent that the
fiduciary recovers or expects to recover the payment from a
third party. The net income and principal receipts from the
property are determined by including all of the amounts the
fiduciary receives or pays with respect to the property, whether
those amounts accrued or became due before, on, or after the
date of a decedent's death or an income interest's terminating
event, and by making a reasonable provision for amounts that the
fiduciary believes the estate or terminating income interest may
become obligated to pay after the property is distributed.

     2-3-807. Distribution to residuary and remainder
beneficiaries.

     (a) Each beneficiary described in W.S. 2-3-806(a)(iv) is
entitled to receive a portion of the net income equal to the
beneficiary's fractional interest in undistributed principal
assets, using values as of the distribution date. If a fiduciary
makes more than one (1) distribution of assets to beneficiaries
to whom this section applies, each beneficiary, including one
who does not receive part of the distribution, is entitled, as
of each distribution date, to the net income the fiduciary has
received after the date of death or terminating event or earlier
distribution date but has not distributed as of the current
distribution date.

     (b) In determining a beneficiary's share of net income,
the following rules apply:

          (i) The beneficiary is entitled to receive a portion
of the net income equal to the beneficiary's fractional interest
in the undistributed principal assets immediately before the
distribution date, including assets that later may be sold to
meet principal obligations;

          (ii) The beneficiary's fractional interest in the
undistributed principal assets must be calculated without regard
to property specifically given to a beneficiary and property
required to pay pecuniary amounts not in trust;

          (iii) The beneficiary's fractional interest in the
undistributed principal assets must be calculated on the basis
of the aggregate value of those assets as of the distribution
date without reducing the value by any unpaid principal
obligation; and

          (iv) The distribution date for purposes of this
section may be the date as of which the fiduciary calculates the
value of the assets if that date is reasonably near the date on
which assets are actually distributed.

     (c) If a fiduciary does not distribute all of the
collected but undistributed net income to each person as of a
distribution date, the fiduciary shall maintain appropriate
records showing the interest of each beneficiary in that net
income.

     (d) A fiduciary may apply the rules in this section, to
the extent that the fiduciary considers it appropriate, to net
gain or loss realized after the date of death or terminating
event or earlier distribution date from the disposition of a
principal asset if this section applies to the income from the
asset.

     2-3-808.   When right to income begins and ends.

     (a) An income beneficiary is entitled to net income from
the date on which the income interest begins. An income interest
begins on the date specified in the terms of the trust or, if no
date is specified, on the date an asset becomes subject to a
trust or successive income interest.

     (b)   An asset becomes subject to a trust:

          (i) On the date it is transferred to the trust in the
case of an asset that is transferred to a trust during the
transferor's life;

          (ii) On the date of a testator's death in the case of
an asset that becomes subject to a trust by reason of a will,
even if there is an intervening period of administration of the
testator's estate; or

          (iii) On the date of an individual's death in the
case of an asset that is transferred to a fiduciary by a third
party because of the individual's death.

     (c) An asset becomes subject to a successive income
interest on the day after the preceding income interest ends, as
determined under subsection (d) of this section, even if there
is an intervening period of administration to wind up the
preceding income interest.

     (d) An income interest ends on the day before an income
beneficiary dies or another terminating event occurs, or on the
last day of a period during which there is no beneficiary to
whom a trustee may distribute income.

     2-3-809. Apportionment of receipts and disbursements when
decedent dies or income interest begins.
     (a) A trustee shall allocate an income receipt or
disbursement other than one to which W.S. 2-3-806(a)(i) applies
to principal if its due date occurs before a decedent dies in
the case of an estate or before an income interest begins in the
case of a trust or successive income interest.

     (b) A trustee shall allocate an income receipt or
disbursement to income if its due date occurs on or after the
date on which a decedent dies or an income interest begins and
it is a periodic due date. An income receipt or disbursement
must be treated as accruing from day to day if its due date is
not periodic or it has no due date. The portion of the receipt
or disbursement accruing before the date on which a decedent
dies or an income interest begins must be allocated to principal
and the balance must be allocated to income.

     (c) An item of income or an obligation is due on the date
the payer is required to make a payment. If a payment date is
not stated, there is no due date for the purposes of this act.
Distributions to shareholders or other owners from an entity to
which W.S. 2-3-810 applies are deemed to be due on the date
fixed by the entity for determining who is entitled to receive
the distribution or, if no date is fixed, on the declaration
date for the distribution. A due date is periodic for receipts
or disbursements that must be paid at regular intervals under a
lease or an obligation to pay interest or if an entity
customarily makes distributions at regular intervals.

     2-3-810.   Apportionment when income interest ends.

     (a) In this section, "undistributed income" means net
income received before the date on which an income interest
ends. The term does not include an item of income or expense
that is due or accrued or net income that has been added or is
required to be added to principal under the terms of the trust.

     (b) When a mandatory income interest ends, the trustee
shall pay to a mandatory income beneficiary who survives that
date, or the estate of a deceased mandatory income beneficiary
whose death causes the interest to end, the beneficiary's share
of the undistributed income that is not disposed of under the
terms of the trust unless the beneficiary has an unqualified
power to revoke more than five percent (5%) of the trust
immediately before the income interest ends. In the latter case,
the undistributed income from the portion of the trust that may
be revoked must be added to principal.
     (c) When a trustee's obligation to pay a fixed annuity or
a fixed fraction of the value of the trust's assets ends, the
trustee shall prorate the final payment if and to the extent
required by applicable law to accomplish a purpose of the trust
or its settlor relating to income, gift, estate or other tax
requirements.

     2-3-811.    Character of receipts.

     (a) In this section, "entity" means a corporation,
partnership, limited liability company, regulated investment
company, real estate investment trust, common trust fund or any
other organization in which a trustee has an interest other than
a trust or estate to which W.S. 2-3-811 applies, a business or
activity to which W.S. 2-3-813 applies or an asset-backed
security to which W.S. 2-3-825 applies.

     (b) Except as otherwise provided in this section, a
trustee shall allocate to income money received from an entity.

     (c) A trustee shall allocate the following receipts from
an entity to principal:

           (i)   Property other than money;

          (ii) Money received in one (1) distribution or a
series of related distributions in exchange for part or all of a
trust's interest in the entity;

          (iii) Money received in total or partial liquidation
of the entity; and

          (iv) Money received from an entity that is a
regulated investment company or a real estate investment trust
if the money distributed is a capital gain dividend for federal
income tax purposes.

     (d)   Money is received in partial liquidation:

          (i) To the extent that the entity, at or near the
time of a distribution, indicates that it is a distribution in
partial liquidation; or

          (ii) If the total amount of money and property
received in a distribution or series of related distributions is
greater than twenty percent (20%) of the entity's gross assets,
as shown by the entity's year-end financial statements
immediately preceding the initial receipt.

     (e) Money is not received in partial liquidation, nor may
it be taken into account under paragraph (d)(ii) of this
section, to the extent that it does not exceed the amount of
income tax that a trustee or beneficiary must pay on taxable
income of the entity that distributes the money.

     (f) A trustee may rely upon a statement made by an entity
about the source or character of a distribution if the statement
is made at or near the time of distribution by the entity's
board of directors or other person or group of persons
authorized to exercise powers to pay money or transfer property
comparable to those of a corporation's board of directors.

     2-3-812.   Distribution from trust or estate.

A trustee shall allocate to income an amount received as a
distribution of income from a trust or an estate in which the
trust has an interest other than a purchased interest, and shall
allocate to principal an amount received as a distribution of
principal from such a trust or estate. If a trustee purchases an
interest in a trust that is an investment entity, or a decedent
or donor transfers an interest in such a trust to a trustee,
W.S. 2-3-811 or 2-3-825 applies to a receipt from the trust.

     2-3-813.   Business and other activities conducted by
trustee.

     (a) If a trustee who conducts a business or other activity
determines that it is in the best interest of all the
beneficiaries to account separately for the business or activity
instead of accounting for it as part of the trust's general
accounting records, the trustee may maintain separate accounting
records for its transactions, whether or not its assets are
segregated from other trust assets.

     (b) A trustee who accounts separately for a business or
other activity may determine the extent to which its net cash
receipts must be retained for working capital, the acquisition
or replacement of fixed assets, and other reasonably foreseeable
needs of the business or activity, and the extent to which the
remaining net cash receipts are accounted for as principal or
income in the trust's general accounting records. If a trustee
sells assets of the business or other activity, other than in
the ordinary course of the business or activity, the trustee
shall account for the net amount received as principal in the
trust's general accounting records to the extent the trustee
determines that the amount received is no longer required in the
conduct of the business.

     (c) Activities for which a trustee may maintain separate
accounting records include:

          (i) Retail, manufacturing, service and other
traditional business activities;

           (ii)    Farming;

           (iii)    Raising and selling livestock and other
animals;

           (iv)    Management of rental properties;

           (v)    Extraction of minerals and other natural
resources;

           (vi)    Timber operations; and

           (vii)    Activities to which W.S. 2-3-824 applies.

     2-3-814.     Principal receipts.

     (a)   A trustee shall allocate to principal:

          (i) To the extent not allocated to income under this
act, assets received from a transferor during the transferor's
lifetime, a decedent's estate, a trust with a terminating income
interest or a payer under a contract naming the trust or its
trustee as beneficiary;

          (ii) Money or other property received from the sale,
exchange, liquidation or change in form of a principal asset,
including realized profit, subject to W.S. 2-3-811 through
2-3-825;

          (iii) Amounts recovered from third parties to
reimburse the trust because of disbursements described in W.S.
2-3-827(a)(vii) or for other reasons to the extent not based on
the loss of income;

          (iv) Proceeds of property taken by eminent domain,
but a separate award made for the loss of income with respect to
an accounting period during which a current income beneficiary
had a mandatory income interest is income;

          (v) Net income received in an accounting period
during which there is no beneficiary to whom a trustee may or
must distribute income; and

          (vi) Other receipts as provided in W.S. 2-3-818
through 2-3-825.

     2-3-815.   Rental property.

To the extent that a trustee accounts for receipts from rental
property pursuant to this section, the trustee shall allocate to
income an amount received as rent of real or personal property,
including an amount received for cancellation or renewal of a
lease. An amount received as a refundable deposit, including a
security deposit or a deposit that is to be applied as rent for
future periods, must be added to principal and held subject to
the terms of the lease and is not available for distribution to
a beneficiary until the trustee's contractual obligations have
been satisfied with respect to that amount.

     2-3-816.   Obligation to pay money.

     (a) An amount received as interest, whether determined at
a fixed, variable or floating rate, on an obligation to pay
money to the trustee, including an amount received as
consideration for prepaying principal, must be allocated to
income without any provision for amortization of premium.

     (b) A trustee shall allocate to principal an amount
received from the sale, redemption or other disposition of an
obligation to pay money to the trustee more than one (1) year
after it is purchased or acquired by the trustee, including an
obligation the purchase price or value of which when it is
acquired is less than its value at maturity. If the obligation
matures within one (1) year after it is purchased or acquired by
the trustee, an amount received in excess of its purchase price
or its value when acquired by the trust must be allocated to
income.

     (c) This section does not apply to obligations to which
W.S. 2-3-819 through 2-3-822, 2-3-824 or 2-3-825 applies.

     2-3-817.   Insurance policies and similar contracts.
     (a) Except as otherwise provided in subsection (b) of this
section, a trustee shall allocate to principal the proceeds of a
life insurance policy or other contract in which the trust or
its trustee is named as beneficiary, including a contract that
insures the trust or its trustee against loss for damage to,
destruction of or loss of title to a trust asset. The trustee
shall allocate dividends on an insurance policy to income if the
premiums on the policy are paid from income, and to principal if
the premiums are paid from principal.

     (b) A trustee shall allocate to income proceeds of a
contract that insures the trustee against loss of occupancy or
other use by an income beneficiary, loss of income, or, subject
to W.S. 2-3-813, loss of profits from a business.

     (c) This section does not apply to a contract to which
W.S. 2-3-819 applies.

     2-3-818.   Insubstantial allocation not required.

     (a) If a trustee determines that an allocation between
principal and income required by W.S. 2-3-819 through 2-3-822 or
2-3-825 is insubstantial, the trustee may allocate the entire
amount to principal unless one of the circumstances described in
W.S. 2-3-804(c) applies to the allocation. This power may be
exercised by a cotrustee in the circumstances described in W.S.
2-3-804(d) and may be released for the reasons and in the manner
described in W.S. 2-3-804(e). An allocation is presumed to be
insubstantial if:

          (i) The amount of the allocation would increase or
decrease net income in an accounting period, as determined
before the allocation, by less than ten percent (10%); or

          (ii) The value of the asset producing the receipt for
which the allocation would be made is less than ten percent
(10%) of the total value of the trust's assets at the beginning
of the accounting period.

     2-3-819.   Deferred compensation, annuities and similar
payments.

     (a)   As used in this section:

          (i) "Payment" means a payment that a trustee may
receive over a fixed number of years or during the life of one
(1) or more individuals because of services rendered or property
transferred to the payer in exchange for future payments. The
term includes a payment made in money or property from the
payer's general assets or from a separate fund created by the
payer. For the purposes of subsections (d) through (g) of this
section, the term also includes any payment from any separate
fund, regardless of the reason for the payment;

          (ii) "Separate fund" includes a private or commercial
annuity, an individual retirement account, and a pension,
profit-sharing, stock-bonus or stock-ownership plan.

     (b) To the extent that a payment is characterized by the
separate fund as interest, a dividend or a payment made in lieu
of interest or a dividend, a trustee shall allocate it to
income. The trustee shall allocate to principal the balance of
the payment and any other payment received in the same
accounting period that is not characterized as interest, a
dividend or an equivalent payment.

     (c) If no part of a payment is characterized by the
separate fund as interest, a dividend or an equivalent payment,
and all or part of the payment is required to be made, a trustee
shall allocate to income ten percent (10%) of the part that is
required to be made during the accounting period and the balance
to principal. If no part of a payment is required to be made or
the payment received is the entire amount to which the trustee
is entitled, the trustee shall allocate the entire payment to
principal. For purposes of this subsection, a payment is not
"required to be made" to the extent that it is made because the
trustee exercises a right of withdrawal.

     (d) Except as otherwise provided in subsection (e) of this
section, subsections (f) and (g) of this section shall apply,
and subsection (b) and (c) of this section shall not apply in
determining the allocation of a payment made from a separate
fund to:

          (i) A trust to which an election to qualify for a
marital deduction under section 2056(b)(7) of the Internal
Revenue Code has been made;

          (ii) A trust that qualifies for the marital deduction
under section 2056(b)(5) of the Internal Revenue Code; or

          (iii) A trust which requires payment of all trust
income to the trust beneficiaries during the accounting period.
     (e) Paragraph (d)(i) and subsections (f) and (g) of this
section shall not apply if, and to the extent that, the series
of payments would, without the application of paragraph (d)(i)
of this section, qualify for the marital deduction under section
2056(b)(7)(C) of the Internal Revenue Code.

     (f) A trustee shall determine the internal income of each
separate fund for the accounting period as if the separate fund
were a separate trust fund subject to this act. Upon request of
the surviving spouse or other trust beneficiaries with the right
to all the trust income, the trustee shall demand that the
person administering the separate fund distribute the internal
income to the trust. The trustee shall allocate a payment from
the separate fund to income to the extent of the internal income
of the separate fund and distribute that amount to or for the
benefit of the surviving spouse or other trust beneficiaries
with the right to all the trust income. The trustee shall
allocate the balance of the payment to the principal. Upon
request of the surviving spouse or other trust beneficiaries
with the right to all the trust income, the trustee shall
allocate principal to income to the extent the internal income
of the separate fund exceeds payments made from the separate
fund to the trust during the accounting period.

     (g) If a trustee cannot determine the internal income of a
separate fund but can determine the value of the separate fund,
the internal income of the separate fund is deemed to equal
three percent (3%) of the fund's value, according to the most
recent statement of value preceding the beginning of the
accounting period. If the trustee can determine neither the
internal income of the separate fund nor the fund's value, the
internal income of the fund is deemed to equal the product of
the interest rate and the present value of the expected future
payments, as determined under section 7520 of the Internal
Revenue Code for the month preceding the accounting period for
which the computation is made.

     (h) This section does not apply to payments to which W.S.
2-3-820 applies.

     2-3-820.   Liquidating asset.

     (a) In this section, "liquidating asset" means an asset
whose value will diminish or terminate because the asset is
expected to produce receipts for a period of limited duration.
The term includes a leasehold, patent, copyright, royalty right
and right to receive payments during a period of more than one
(1) year under an arrangement that does not provide for the
payment of interest on the unpaid balance. The term does not
include a payment subject to W.S. 2-3-819, resources subject to
W.S. 2-3-821, timber subject to W.S. 2-3-822, an activity
subject to W.S. 2-3-824, an asset subject to W.S. 2-3-825 or any
asset for which the trustee establishes a reserve for
depreciation under W.S. 2-3-828.

     (b) A trustee shall allocate to income ten percent (10%)
of the receipts from a liquidating asset and the balance to
principal.

     2-3-821.   Minerals, water and other natural resources.

     (a) To the extent that a trustee accounts for receipts
from an interest in minerals or other natural resources pursuant
to this section, the trustee shall allocate them as follows:

          (i) If received as nominal delay rental or nominal
annual rent on a lease, a receipt must be allocated to income;

           (ii) If received from a production payment, a receipt
must be allocated to income if and to the extent that the
agreement creating the production payment provides a factor for
interest or its equivalent. The balance must be allocated to
principal;

          (iii) If an amount received as a royalty, shut-in-
well payment, take-or-pay payment, bonus or delay rental is more
than nominal, twenty-seven and one-half percent (27.5%) must be
allocated to principal and the balance to income;

          (iv) If an amount is received from a working interest
or any other interest not provided for in paragraph (i), (ii) or
(iii) of this subsection, twenty-seven and one-half percent
(27.5%) of the net amount received must be allocated to
principal and the balance to income.

     (b) An amount received on account of an interest in water
that is renewable must be allocated to income. If the water is
not renewable, twenty-seven and one-half percent (27.5%) of the
amount must be allocated to principal and the balance to income.

     (c) This act applies whether or not a decedent or donor
was extracting minerals, water or other natural resources before
the interest became subject to the trust.
     (d) If a trust owns an interest in minerals, water or
other natural resources on the effective date of this act, the
trustee may allocate receipts from the interest as provided in
this act or in the manner used by the trustee before the
effective date of this act. If the trust acquires an interest in
minerals, water or other natural resources after the effective
date of this act, the trustee shall allocate receipts as
provided in this act.

     2-3-822.   Timber.

     (a) To the extent that a trustee accounts for receipts
from the sale of timber and related products pursuant to this
section, the trustee shall allocate the net receipts:

          (i) To income to the extent that the amount of timber
removed from the land does not exceed the estimated rate of
growth of the timber during the accounting periods in which a
beneficiary has a mandatory income interest;

          (ii) To principal to the extent that the amount of
timber removed from the land exceeds the estimated rate of
growth of the timber or the net receipts are from the sale of
standing timber;

          (iii) To or between income and principal if the net
receipts are from the lease of timberland or from a contract to
cut timber from land owned by a trust, by determining the amount
of timber removed from the land under the lease or contract and
applying the rules in paragraphs (i) and (ii) of this
subsection; or

          (iv) To principal to the extent that advance
payments, bonuses and other payments are not allocated pursuant
to paragraph (i), (ii) or (iii) of this subsection.

     (b) In determining net receipts to be allocated pursuant
to subsection (a) of this section, a trustee shall deduct and
transfer to principal a reasonable amount for depletion.

     (c) This act applies whether or not a decedent or
transferor was harvesting timber from the property before it
became subject to the trust.

     (d) If a trust owns an interest in timberland on the
effective date of this act, the trustee may allocate net
receipts from the sale of timber and related products as
provided in this act or in the manner used by the trustee before
the effective date of this act. If the trust acquires an
interest in timberland after the effective date of this act, the
trustee shall allocate net receipts from the sale of timber and
related products as provided in this act.

     2-3-823.   Property not productive of income.

     (a) If a marital deduction is allowed for all or part of a
trust whose assets consist substantially of property that does
not provide the spouse with sufficient income from or use of the
trust assets, and if the amounts that the trustee transfers from
principal to income under W.S. 2-3-804 and distributes to the
spouse from principal pursuant to the terms of the trust are
insufficient to provide the spouse with the beneficial enjoyment
required to obtain the marital deduction, the spouse may require
the trustee to make property productive of income, convert
property within a reasonable time or exercise the power
conferred by W.S. 2-3-804(a). The trustee may decide which
action or combination of actions to take.

     (b) In cases not governed by subsection (a) of this
section, proceeds from the sale or other disposition of an asset
are principal without regard to the amount of income the asset
produces during any accounting period.

     2-3-824.   Derivatives and options.

     (a) In this section, "derivative" means a contract or
financial instrument or a combination of contracts and financial
instruments which gives a trust the right or obligation to
participate in some or all changes in the price of a tangible or
intangible asset or group of assets, or changes in a rate, an
index of prices or rates or other market indicator for an asset
or a group of assets.

     (b) To the extent that a trustee does not account under
W.S. 2-3-813 for transactions in derivatives, the trustee shall
allocate to principal receipts from and disbursements made in
connection with those transactions.

     (c) If a trustee grants an option to buy property from the
trust, whether or not the trust owns the property when the
option is granted, grants an option that permits another person
to sell property to the trust, or acquires an option to buy
property for the trust or an option to sell an asset owned by
the trust, and the trustee or other owner of the asset is
required to deliver the asset if the option is exercised, an
amount received for granting the option must be allocated to
principal. An amount paid to acquire the option must be paid
from principal. A gain or loss realized upon the exercise of an
option, including an option granted to a settlor of the trust
for services rendered, must be allocated to principal.

     2-3-825.    Asset-backed securities.

     (a) In this section, "asset-backed security" means an
asset whose value is based upon the right it gives the owner to
receive distributions from the proceeds of financial assets that
provide collateral for the security. The term includes an asset
that gives the owner the right to receive from the collateral
financial assets only the interest or other current return or
only the proceeds other than interest or current return. The
term does not include an asset to which W.S. 2-3-811 or 2-3-819
applies.

     (b) If a trust receives a payment from interest or other
current return and from other proceeds of the collateral
financial assets, the trustee shall allocate to income the
portion of the payment which the payer identifies as being from
interest or other current return and shall allocate the balance
of the payment to principal.

     (c) If a trust receives one (1) or more payments in
exchange for the trust's entire interest in an asset-backed
security in one (1) accounting period, the trustee shall
allocate the payments to principal. If a payment is one (1) of a
series of payments that will result in the liquidation of the
trust's interest in the security over more than one (1)
accounting period, the trustee shall allocate ten percent (10%)
of the payment to income and the balance to principal.

     2-3-826.    Disbursements from income.

     (a) A trustee shall make the following disbursements from
income to the extent that they are not disbursements to which
W.S. 2-3-806(a)(ii)(B) or (C) applies:

          (i) Interest, except interest on taxes as provided in
W.S. 2-3-827(a)(vi);

          (ii)    Ordinary repairs and maintenance of real estate;
          (iii) Real estate taxes and other regularly recurring
taxes assessed against principal; and

           (iv) Recurring premiums on insurance covering the
loss of a principal asset or the loss of income from or use of
the asset.

     2-3-827.    Disbursements from principal.

     (a) A trustee shall make the following disbursements from
principal:

          (i) Extraordinary expenses incurred in connection
with the administration, management or preservation of trust
property and the distribution of income;

          (ii)    Extraordinary repairs;

          (iii)    Repealed by Laws 2015, ch. 79, § 3.

          (iv) Expenses in connection with accountings and
judicial or other proceedings to construe, modify or reform the
trust or to protect the trust or its property;

          (v) Premiums paid on a policy of insurance not
described in W.S. 2-3-826(a)(iv) of which the trust is the owner
and beneficiary;

          (vi) Estate, inheritance and other transfer taxes,
including penalties, apportioned to the trust; and

          (vii) Disbursements related to environmental matters,
including reclamation, assessing environmental conditions,
remedying and removing environmental contamination, monitoring
remedial activities and the release of substances, preventing
future releases of substances, collecting amounts from persons
liable or potentially liable for the costs of those activities,
penalties imposed under environmental laws or regulations and
other payments made to comply with those laws or regulations,
statutory or common law claims by third parties and defending
claims based on environmental matters.

     (b) If a principal asset is encumbered with an obligation
that requires income from that asset to be paid directly to the
creditor, the trustee shall transfer from principal to income an
amount equal to the income paid to the creditor in reduction of
the principal balance of the obligation.
     2-3-828.    Transfers from income to principal for
depreciation.

     (a) In this section, "depreciation" means a reduction in
value due to wear, tear, decay, corrosion or gradual
obsolescence of a fixed asset having a useful life of more than
one (1) year and the purchase cost or value of such fixed asset
is more than that amount provided by section 179 of the United
States Internal Revenue Code or subsequent amendment to the
Internal Revenue Code.

     (b) A trustee may transfer to principal a reasonable
amount of the net cash receipts from a principal asset that is
subject to depreciation, but may not transfer any amount for
depreciation:

          (i) Of that portion of real property used or
available for use by a beneficiary as a residence or of tangible
personal property held or made available for the personal use or
enjoyment of a beneficiary;

          (ii)    During the administration of a decedent's
estate; or

          (iii) Under this section if the trustee is accounting
under W.S. 2-3-813 for the business or activity in which the
asset is used.

     (c) An amount transferred to principal need not be held as
a separate fund.

     2-3-829.    Transfers from income to reimburse principal.

     (a) If a trustee makes or expects to make a principal
disbursement described in this section, the trustee may transfer
an appropriate amount from income to principal in one (1) or
more accounting periods to reimburse principal or to provide a
reserve for future principal disbursements.

     (b) Principal disbursements to which subsection (a) of
this section applies include the following, but only to the
extent that the trustee has not been and does not expect to be
reimbursed by a third party:
          (i) An amount chargeable to income but paid from
principal because it is unusually large, including extraordinary
repairs;

          (ii) A capital improvement to a principal asset,
whether in the form of changes to an existing asset or the
construction of a new asset, including special assessments;

          (iii) Disbursements made to prepare property for
rental, including tenant allowances, leasehold improvements and
broker's commissions;

          (iv) Periodic payments on an obligation secured by a
principal asset to the extent that the amount transferred from
income to principal for depreciation is less than the periodic
payments; and

          (v)    Disbursements described in W.S. 2-3-827(a)(vii).

     (c) If the asset whose ownership gives rise to the
disbursements becomes subject to a successive income interest
after an income interest ends, a trustee may continue to
transfer amounts from income to principal as provided in
subsection (a) of this section.

     2-3-830.    Income taxes.

     (a) A tax required to be paid by a trustee based on
receipts allocated to income must be paid from income.

     (b) A tax required to be paid by a trustee based on
receipts allocated to principal must be paid from principal,
even if the tax is called an income tax by the taxing authority.

     (c) A tax required to be paid by a trustee on the trust's
share of an entity's taxable income must be paid
proportionately:

          (i) From income to the extent that receipts from the
entity are allocated to income; and

          (ii)    From principal to the extent that:

                 (A)   Receipts from the entity are allocated to
principal; and
               (B) The trust's share of the entity's taxable
income exceeds the total receipts described in paragraph (i) and
subparagraph (ii)(A) of this subsection.

     (d) For purposes of this section, receipts allocated to
principal or income must be reduced by the amount distributed to
a beneficiary from principal or income for which the trust
receives a deduction in calculating the tax.

     2-3-831.    Adjustments between principal and income.

     (a) Subject to W.S. 2-3-826 and 2-3-827, a trustee may, in
the discretion of the trustee, allocate to income, principal or
partly to each, the ordinary expenses incurred in connection
with the administration, management or preservation of trust
property and the distribution of income including the
compensation of the trustee and of agents hired by the trustee
including investment advisors, custodians or income tax
preparation services.

          (i)    Repealed by Laws 2015, ch. 79, § 3.

          (ii)    Repealed by Laws 2015, ch. 79, § 3.

          (iii)    Repealed by Laws 2015, ch. 79, § 3.

     (b) If the amount of an estate tax marital deduction or
charitable contribution deduction is reduced because a fiduciary
deducts an amount paid from principal for income tax purposes
instead of deducting it for estate tax purposes, and as a result
estate taxes paid from principal are increased and income taxes
paid by an estate, trust or beneficiary are decreased, each
estate, trust or beneficiary that benefits from the decrease in
income tax shall reimburse the principal from which the increase
in estate tax is paid. The total reimbursement must equal the
increase in the estate tax to the extent that the principal used
to pay the increase would have qualified for a marital deduction
or charitable contribution deduction but for the payment. The
proportionate share of the reimbursement for each estate, trust
or beneficiary whose income taxes are reduced must be the same
as its proportionate share of the total decrease in income tax.
An estate or trust shall reimburse principal from income.

     2-3-832.    Judicial control of discretionary powers.

     (a) A court shall not change a fiduciary's decision to
exercise or not to exercise a discretionary power conferred by
this act unless it determines that the decision was an abuse of
the fiduciary's discretion. A court shall not determine that a
fiduciary abused its discretion merely because the court would
have exercised the discretion in a different manner or would not
have exercised the discretion.

     (b) The decisions to which subsection (a) of this section
applies include:

          (i) A determination under W.S. 2-3-804(a) of whether
and to what extent an amount should be transferred from
principal to income or from income to principal;

          (ii) A determination of the factors that are relevant
to the trust and its beneficiaries, the extent to which they are
relevant, and the weight, if any, to be given to the relevant
factors, in deciding whether and to what extent to exercise the
power conferred by W.S. 2-3-804(a).

     (c) If a court determines that a fiduciary has abused its
discretion, the remedy is to restore the income and remainder
beneficiaries to the positions they would have occupied if the
fiduciary had not abused its discretion, according to the
following rules:

          (i) To the extent that the abuse of discretion has
resulted in no distribution to a beneficiary or a distribution
that is too small, the court shall require the fiduciary to
distribute from the trust to the beneficiary an amount that the
court determines will restore the beneficiary, in whole or in
part, to his appropriate position;

          (ii) To the extent that the abuse of discretion has
resulted in a distribution to a beneficiary that is too large,
the court shall restore the beneficiaries, the trust, or both,
in whole or in part, to their appropriate positions by requiring
the fiduciary to withhold an amount from one (1) or more future
distributions to the beneficiary who received the distribution
that was too large or requiring that beneficiary to return some
or all of the distribution to the trust;

          (iii) To the extent that the court is unable, after
applying paragraphs (i) and (ii) of this subsection, to restore
the beneficiaries, the trust, or both, to the positions they
would have occupied if the fiduciary had not abused its
discretion, the court may require the fiduciary to pay an
appropriate amount from its own funds to one (1) or more of the
beneficiaries or the trust or both.

     (d) Upon a petition by the fiduciary, the court having
jurisdiction over the trust or estate shall determine whether a
proposed exercise or nonexercise by the fiduciary of a
discretionary power conferred by this act will result in an
abuse of the fiduciary's discretion. If the petition describes
the proposed exercise or nonexercise of the power and contains
sufficient information to inform the beneficiaries of the
reasons for the proposal, the facts upon which the fiduciary
relies, and an explanation of how the income and remainder
beneficiaries will be affected by the proposed exercise or
nonexercise of the power, a beneficiary who challenges the
proposed exercise or nonexercise has the burden of establishing
that it will result in an abuse of discretion.

     2-3-833.   Uniformity of application and construction.

In applying and construing this uniform act, consideration must
be given to the need to promote uniformity of the law with
respect to its subject matter among states that enact it.

     2-3-834. Application of act to trusts and estates;
principal place of administration.

This act applies to every trust that has its principal place of
administration in Wyoming and to every decedent's estate
probated in Wyoming except where the trust or will expressly
applies the principal and income act of another state or as
otherwise expressly provided in this act.

     2-3-835.   Trustee discretion to include capital gains in
income.

     (a) To the extent a trustee is given the power to make
mandatory or discretionary distributions of income, the trustee
may, on an annual basis, include realized capital gains in trust
income and in determining section 643(a) of the Internal Revenue
Code distributable net income, if the allocation is reasonable
and impartial.

     (b) To the extent a trustee is given the power to make
mandatory or discretionary distributions of principal, the
trustee may, on an annual basis, include realized capital gains
in determining Section 643(a) Internal Revenue Code
distributable net income, if the allocation is reasonable and
impartial.

                  ARTICLE 9 - WYOMING UNITRUST ACT

     2-3-901.    Short title.

This act shall be known and may be cited as the "Wyoming
Unitrust Act".

     2-3-902.    Definitions.

     (a)   As used in this act:

          (i) "Beneficiary" means a person as defined in W.S.
2-3-802(a)(ii);

          (ii) "Disinterested person" means a person who is not
a "related or subordinate party" as defined in § 672(c) of the
Internal Revenue Code, with respect to the person then acting as
trustee of the trust and excludes the settlor of the trust and
any interested trustee;

          (iii) "Income trust" means a trust, created by either
an inter vivos or a testamentary instrument, which directs or
permits the trustee to distribute the net income of the trust to
one (1) or more persons, either in fixed proportions or in
amounts or proportions determined by the trustee.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, no trust that otherwise is an
"income trust" shall qualify under this act, if it may be
subject to taxation under Internal Revenue Code §§ 2001 or 2501,
until the expiration of the period for filing the return
therefore, including extensions;

          (iv) "Interested distributee" means a person to whom
distributions of income or principal can currently be made who
has the power to remove the existing trustee and designate as
successor a person who may be a "related or subordinate party",
as defined in Internal Revenue Code § 672(c) with respect to the
distributee;

           (v)   "Interested trustee" means:

               (A) An individual trustee to whom the net income
or principal of the trust can currently be distributed or would
be distributed if the trust were then to terminate and be
distributed;
               (B) Any trustee who may be removed and replaced
by an interested distributee; or

               (C) An individual trustee whose legal obligation
to support a beneficiary may be satisfied by distributions of
income and principal of the trust.

          (vi) "Total return unitrust" means an income trust
which has been created or converted under and meets the
provisions of this act;

          (vii) "Trustee" means all persons acting as trustee
of the trust, except where expressly noted otherwise, whether
acting in their discretion or on the direction of one (1) or
more persons acting in a fiduciary capacity;

          (viii) "Settlor" means a person as defined in W.S.
4-10-103(a)(xviii);

          (ix) "Unitrust amount" means an amount computed as a
percentage of the fair market value of the trust;

          (x)   "This act" means W.S. 2-3-901 through 2-3-917.

     2-3-903. Unitrust election by trustee; requirements to
make unitrust election.

     (a) A trustee, other than an interested trustee, or where
two (2) or more persons are acting as trustees, a majority of
the trustees who are not interested trustees may, in its sole
discretion and without the approval of the district court:

          (i) Elect to release the power to adjust described in
W.S. 2-3-804 and to convert an income trust to a total return
unitrust;

          (ii) Reconvert a total return unitrust to an income
trust and reinstate the power to adjust described in W.S.
2-3-804; or

          (iii) Change the percentage used to calculate the
unitrust amount or the method used to determine the fair market
value of the trust if the following requirements are completed:

               (A)   The trustee adopts a written policy for the
trust providing:
                    (I) In the case of a trust being
administered as an income trust, that future distributions from
the trust will be unitrust amounts rather than net income;

                     (II) In the case of a trust being
administered as a total return unitrust, that future
distributions from the trust will be net income rather than
unitrust amounts; or

                    (III) That the percentage used to calculate
the unitrust amount or the method used to determine the fair
market value of the trust will be changed as stated in the
policy.

     (b) The trustee shall mail notice of the proposed action
to all beneficiaries who are receiving, or are entitled to
receive, income under the trust or to receive a distribution of
principal if the trust were terminated at the time the notice is
given assuming nonexercise of all powers of appointment.

     (c) Notice of proposed action need not be given to any
person who consents in writing to the proposed action. The
consent may be executed at any time before or after the proposed
action is taken.

     (d) The written notice of its intention to take action
shall include the following:

          (i)   The name and mailing address of the trustee;

          (ii) The name and telephone number of a person who
may be contacted for additional information;

          (iii) A description of the action proposed to be
taken and an explanation of the reasons for the action;

          (iv) A copy of the trustee's written policy discussed
in subparagraph (a)(iii)(A) of this section;

          (v) The time within which objections to the proposed
action can be made, which shall be at least thirty (30) days
from the mailing of the notice of proposed action; and

          (vi) The date on or after which the proposed action
may be taken or is effective.
     (e) A beneficiary may object to the proposed action by
mailing a written objection to the trustee stating the objection
and the basis or reason for the objection at the address stated
in the notice of proposed action within the time period
specified in the notice of proposed action.

     (f) If the trustee receives a written objection stating
the basis or reason for the objection within the applicable
period, either the trustee or a beneficiary may petition the
court to have the proposed action taken as proposed, taken with
modifications, or denied.

     (g) A beneficiary who has not objected is not estopped
from opposing the proposed action in the proceeding.

     (h) If the trustee decides not to implement the proposed
action, the trustee shall notify the beneficiaries of the
decision not to take the action and the reasons for the
decision, and the trustee's decision not to implement the
proposed action shall not itself give rise to liability to any
current or future beneficiary.

     2-3-904. Unitrust election where there is no trustee other
than an interested trustee; requirements to make unitrust
election.

     (a) If there is no trustee of the trust other than an
interested trustee, the interested trustee, or where two (2) or
more persons are acting as trustees and are interested trustees,
a majority of the interested trustees, in its sole discretion
and without the approval of the district court, may:

          (i) Elect to release the power to adjust described in
W.S. 2-3-804 and to convert an income trust to a total return
unitrust;

          (ii) Reconvert a total return unitrust to an income
trust and reinstate the power to adjust described in W.S.
2-3-804; or

          (iii) Change the percentage used to calculate the
unitrust amount or the method used to determine the fair market
value of the trust if the requirements of W.S. 2-3-903(a)
through (f) are completed and the trustee appoints a
disinterested person who, in its sole discretion but acting in a
fiduciary capacity, determines for the trustee:
               (A)      The percentage to be used to calculate the
unitrust amount;

               (B) The method to be used in determining the
fair market value of the trust; and

               (C) Which assets, if any are to be excluded in
determining the unitrust amount.

     2-3-905. Unitrust election by beneficiary; ability to
request trustee action.

     (a) A beneficiary, who is receiving, or is entitled to
receive, income under the trust or to receive a distribution of
principal if the trust were terminated, may:

          (i) Submit to the trustee a written request to
convert an income trust to a total return unitrust;

            (ii)    Reconvert a total return unitrust to an income
trust; or

          (iii) Change the percentage used to calculate the
unitrust amount pursuant to W.S. 2-3-904.

     (b) If the trustee declines or fails to act within six (6)
months of receipt of the written request, the beneficiary may
petition the district court to order the conversion or
adjustment.

     2-3-906.      Settlor created unitrust.

A settlor may create a trust instrument with terms providing
that the trust shall be administered as a total return unitrust
under this act. A settlor may also create a trust instrument
with terms providing that the trust may be administered as
either an income trust or as a total return unitrust under this
act in the discretion of the trustee or a trust protector
appointed in the trust instrument.

     2-3-907.      Valuations.

     (a) The fair market value of a trust subject to this act
shall be determined, at least annually, using a valuation date
or dates or averages of valuation dates as are deemed
appropriate except that:
          (i) The trustee shall not include in the fair market
value the value of any residential property or any tangible
personal property that the income beneficiary has the right to
occupy or use;

          (ii) The trustee shall not limit or restrict any
right of the beneficiary to use the excluded property in
accordance with the governing instrument; and

          (iii) Where the terms of the trust do not provide
contrary direction, the trustee shall include in the fair market
value the value of:

               (A) The portion of any private or commercial
annuity from which the trustee is receiving distributions as a
designated beneficiary of the annuity; and

               (B) The portion of any individual retirement
account and pension, profit-sharing, stock bonus or stock
ownership plan retirement account from which the trustee is
receiving distributions as a designated beneficiary of the
account.

     (b) Assets for which a fair market value cannot be readily
ascertained shall be valued using valuation methods as are
deemed reasonable and appropriate as determined in the sole
discretion of the trustee. The assets may be excluded from
valuation in the sole discretion of the trustee, provided all
income received with respect to the assets is distributed to the
extent distributable in accordance with the terms of the
governing instrument.

     2-3-908.   Unitrust percentages.

The percentage to be used in determining the unitrust amount
shall be a reasonable current return from the trust, in any
event not less than three percent (3%) nor more than five
percent (5%), taking into account the intentions of the settlor
of the trust as expressed in the governing instrument, the needs
of the beneficiaries, general economic conditions, projected
current earnings and appreciation for the trust, and projected
inflation and its impact on the trust.

     2-3-909.   Treatment and allocation of income.
     (a) Following the conversion of an income trust to a total
return unitrust or upon creation of a total return unitrust by a
settlor, the trustee:

          (i) Shall treat the unitrust amount as net income of
the trust for purposes of determining the amount available, from
time to time, for distribution from the trust; and

          (ii) May allocate to trust income for each taxable
year of the trust, or portion thereof:

               (A) Net short-term capital gain described in
Internal Revenue Code § 1222(5) for the year, or portion
thereof, but only to the extent that the amount so allocated
together with all other amounts allocated to trust income for
the year, or portion thereof does not exceed the unitrust amount
for the year, a portion thereof; and

               (B) Net long-term capital gain described in
Internal Revenue Code § 1222(7) for the year, or portion
thereof, but only to the extent that the amount so allocated
together with all other amounts, including amounts described in
subparagraph (A) of this paragraph, allocated to trust income
for the year, or portion thereof, does not exceed the unitrust
amount for the year, or portion thereof.

     2-3-910.   Administration.

     (a) In administering a total return unitrust, the trustee
may, in its sole discretion, but subject to the provisions of
the governing instrument, determine:

          (i)   The effective date of the conversion;

          (ii) The timing of distributions, including
provisions for prorating a distribution for a short year in
which a beneficiary's right to payments commences or ceases;

          (iii) Whether distributions are to be made in cash or
in kind or partly in cash and partly in kind;

          (iv) If the trust is reconverted to an income trust,
the effective date of the reconversion; and

          (v) Other administrative issues as may be necessary
or appropriate to carry out the purposes of this act.
     2-3-911.   Treatment of underpayments or overpayments.

In the event of an underpayment to a beneficiary, the trustee
shall pay to a beneficiary within a reasonable time, and in the
event of an overpayment to a beneficiary, the trustee shall
recover from the beneficiary either by repayment by the
beneficiary or by withholding from future distributions to the
beneficiary, an amount equal to the difference between the
amount properly payable and the amount actually paid.

     2-3-912.   Effect of conversion on governing instrument.

Conversion to a total return unitrust under the provisions of
this act shall not affect any other provision of the governing
instrument, if any, regarding distributions of principal.

     2-3-913.   Situs.

     (a) This act shall be construed as pertaining to the
administration of a trust and shall be available to any trust
that is administered in Wyoming under Wyoming law unless:

          (i) The governing instrument reflects an intention
that the beneficiary or beneficiaries are to receive an amount
other than a reasonable current return from the trust;

          (ii) The trust is a trust described in Internal
Revenue Code §§ 170(f)(2)(B), 664(d), 2702(a)(3) or 2702(b); or

          (iii) The governing instrument expressly prohibits
use of this act by specific reference to this act.

     2-3-914.   Trustee's liability.

Any trustee or disinterested person who in good faith takes or
fails to take any action under this act shall not be liable to
any person affected by the action or inaction, regardless of
whether the person received written notice as provided in this
act and regardless of whether the person was under a legal
disability at the time of the delivery of the notice. The
person's exclusive remedy shall be to obtain an order of the
district court directing the trustee to convert an income trust
to a total return unitrust, to reconvert from a total return
unitrust to an income trust or to change the percentage used to
calculate the unitrust amount.

     2-3-915.   Judicial control of discretionary powers.
     (a) A court shall not change a trustee's decision to
exercise or not to exercise a discretionary power conferred by
this act unless it determines that the decision was an abuse of
the trustee's discretion. A court shall not determine that a
trustee abused its discretion merely because the court would
have exercised the discretion in a different manner or would not
have exercised the discretion.

     (b) Where a beneficiary elects to challenge an action or
nonaction by a trustee or disinterested party under the powers
and authority granted in the party under this act, the
beneficiary has the burden of establishing, by a preponderance
of the evidence, that the actions or nonactions by a trustee or
a disinterested party abused the trustee's or the party's
discretion. A beneficiary who fails to state a basis or reason
for an objection or fails to prove by a preponderance of the
evidence the proposed action should be taken or should not be
taken shall be liable to all other beneficiaries for damages and
costs associated with the objection.

     2-3-916.    Limitation of election.

An action shall not be taken under W.S. 2-3-903, 2-3-904 or
2-3-905 more frequently than every two (2) years, unless the
district court orders otherwise.

     2-3-917.    Application.

This act applies to every trust or decedent's estate existing on
July 1, 2007 or created thereafter except as otherwise expressly
provided in the will or terms of the trust or in this act.

   ARTICLE 10 - UNIFORM FIDUCIARY ACCESS TO DIGITAL ASSETS ACT

     2-3-1001.   Uniform Fiduciary Access to Digital Assets Act;
short title.

This act shall be known and may be cited as the "Uniform
Fiduciary Access to Digital Assets Act."

     2-3-1002.   Definitions.

     (a)   As used in this act:

          (i) "Account" means an arrangement under a terms of
service agreement in which a custodian carries, maintains,
processes, receives or stores a digital asset of a user or
provides goods or services to a user;

          (ii) "Agent" means an attorney in fact granted
authority under a power of attorney;

          (iii) "Carries" means engages in the transmission of
an electronic communication;

          (iv) "Catalogue of electronic communications" means
information that identifies a person with which a user has had
an electronic communication, including the person's electronic
address, and the time and date of the communication;

          (v) "Content of electronic communications" means
information concerning the substance or meaning of an electronic
communication that:

               (A)   Has been sent or received by a user;

               (B) Is in electronic storage by a custodian
providing an electronic communication service to the public or
is carried or maintained by a custodian providing a remote
computing service to the public; and

               (C)   Is not readily accessible to the public.

          (vi) "Custodian" means a person that carries,
maintains, processes, receives or stores a digital asset of a
user through the internet as defined in W.S. 9-2-3219(a)(iii);

          (vii) "Designated recipient" means a person chosen by
a user using an online tool to administer digital assets of the
user;

          (viii) "Digital asset" means an electronic record in
which a person has a right or interest. "Digital asset" does
not include an underlying asset or liability unless the asset or
liability is itself an electronic record;

          (ix) "Electronic" means relating to technology having
electrical, digital, magnetic, wireless, optical,
electromagnetic or similar capabilities;

          (x) "Electronic communication" means an electronic
communication as defined in section 2510 of title 18 of the
United States Code, as amended;
          (xi) "Electronic communication service" means a
custodian that provides to a user the ability to send or receive
an electronic communication;

          (xii) "Fiduciary" means a personal representative,
trustee, executor, administrator, guardian, agent, conservator
or other person performing substantially these same functions.
To be a fiduciary under this act a person must be authorized to
act as a fiduciary with respect to the digital assets of a user
or a user's estate. A fiduciary shall have those privileges,
powers and obligations granted under this act which are not
inconsistent with other privileges, powers or obligations
imposed by this act on specific types of fiduciaries;

          (xiii) "Information" means data, text, images,
videos, sounds, codes, computer programs, software, databases or
the like;

          (xiv) "Online tool" means an electronic service
provided by a custodian that allows a user, in an agreement
distinct from a terms of service agreement between the custodian
and the user, to provide directions for disclosure or
nondisclosure of digital assets to a third person;

          (xv) "Principal" means a person who grants authority
to an agent in a power of attorney;

          (xvi) "Record" means information that is inscribed on
a tangible medium or stored in an electronic or other medium and
is retrievable in perceivable form;

          (xvii) "Remote computing service" means a custodian
that provides to a user computer processing services or the
storage of digital assets by means of an electronic
communications system, as defined in section 2510 of title 18 of
the United States Code, as amended;

           (xviii) "Terms of service agreement" means an
agreement that controls the relationship between a user and a
custodian;

          (xix)   "User" means a person that has an account with
a custodian;
          (xx) "Ward" means a person for whom a conservator has
been appointed, including a person for whom an application for
the appointment of a conservator is pending;

            (xxi)    "This act" means W.S. 2-3-1001 through
2-3-1017.

     2-3-1003.      Applicability.

     (a)    This act applies to:

          (i) A fiduciary acting under a will, power of
attorney or other authorization to act as a fiduciary with
respect to the digital assets of a user entered or executed
before, on or after July 1, 2016;

          (ii) A personal representative acting for a decedent
who died before, on or after July 1, 2016;

          (iii) A conservatorship proceeding commenced before,
on or after July 1, 2016; and

          (iv) A trustee acting under a trust created before,
on or after July 1, 2016.

     (b) This act applies to a custodian of digital assets of a
user who resides in the state or resided in the state at the
time of the user's death.

     (c) This act does not apply to digital assets of an
employer used by an employee in the ordinary course of the
employer's business.

     2-3-1004.      User direction for disclosure of digital assets.

     (a) A user may use an online tool to direct a custodian to
disclose or not to disclose to a designated recipient some or
all of the user's digital assets, including the content of
electronic communications sent or received by the user. If the
online tool at all times allows a user to modify or delete a
direction to a custodian to disclose some or all of the user's
digital assets, the direction regarding disclosure overrides a
contrary direction by the user in a will, trust, power of
attorney or other like record.

     (b) If a user has not used an online tool to direct a
custodian under subsection (a) of this section or if a custodian
has not provided an online tool, the user may direct in a will,
trust, power of attorney or other like record the disclosure or
nondisclosure to a fiduciary some or all of the user's digital
assets, including the content of electronic communications sent
or received by the user.

     (c) A user's direction under subsection (a) or (b) of this
section overrides a contrary provision in a terms of service
agreement if the agreement did not require the user to act
affirmatively and distinctly from the user's assent to the
agreement.

     2-3-1005.   Terms of service agreement.

     (a) This act does not change or impair a right of a
custodian or a user under a terms of service agreement to access
and use digital assets of the user.

     (b) This act does not give a fiduciary or designated
recipient new or expanded rights other than those rights held by
the user for whom, or for whose estate, the fiduciary or
designated recipient acts or represents.

     (c) A fiduciary's or designated recipient's access to
digital assets may be modified or eliminated by a user, federal
law or a terms of service agreement if the user has not provided
direction under W.S. 2-3-1004.

     2-3-1006.   Procedure for disclosing digital assets.

     (a) When disclosing digital assets of a user under this
act, a custodian may:

          (i) Grant a fiduciary or designated recipient full
access to the user's account;

          (ii) Grant a fiduciary or designated recipient
partial access to the user's account sufficient to perform the
tasks with which the fiduciary or designated recipient is
charged; or

          (iii) Provide a fiduciary or designated recipient a
copy in a record of any digital asset that, on the date the
custodian received the request for disclosure, the user could
have accessed if the user were alive and had full capacity and
access to the account.
     (b) A custodian may assess a reasonable administrative fee
for the cost of disclosing digital assets under this act.

     (c) A custodian is not required to disclose under this act
a digital asset deleted by a user.

     (d) A custodian is not required to disclose under this act
a user's digital assets if the user directs or a fiduciary
requests a custodian to disclose some, but not all, of the
user's digital assets and the segregation of the assets would
impose an undue burden on the custodian. If a custodian finds
that a direction or request imposes an undue burden, the
custodian or fiduciary may seek an order from the circuit court
or other court of competent jurisdiction to disclose:

          (i) A subset of the user's digital assets limited by
date to the fiduciary or designated recipient;

          (ii) All of the user's digital assets to the
fiduciary or designated recipient;

          (iii) None of the user's digital assets to the
fiduciary or designated recipient; or

          (iv) All of the user's digital assets to the court
for an in camera review.

     2-3-1007. Disclosure of the content of electronic
communications of a deceased user.

     (a) A custodian shall disclose to a personal
representative of the estate of a deceased user the content of
electronic communications sent or received by the user if the
user directed disclosure as specified in W.S. 2-3-1004 or a
court directs disclosure of the content of electronic
communications of the user and if the representative provides
the custodian with the following:

          (i)    A request for disclosure in written or electronic
form;

          (ii)   A certified copy of the death certificate of the
user;

          (iii) A certified copy of the court order appointing
the personal representative;
          (iv) Unless the user provided direction using an
online tool, a copy of the user's will, trust, power of attorney
or other like record evidencing the user's consent to disclosure
of the content of electronic communications; and

          (v)    If requested by the custodian:

               (A) A number, username, address or other unique
subscriber or account identifier assigned by the custodian to
identify the user's account;

                 (B)   Evidence linking the account to the user; or

               (C) A finding by a circuit court or other court
of competent jurisdiction that:

                    (I) The user had a specific account with
the custodian identifiable by the information specified in
subparagraph (A) of this paragraph;

                    (II) Disclosure of the content of
electronic communications of the user would not violate section
2701 et seq. of title 18 of the United States Code, as amended,
or section 222 of title 47 of the United States Code, as
amended, or other applicable law;

                    (III) Unless the user provided direction
using an online tool, the user consented to disclosure of the
content of electronic communications as specified in W.S.
2-3-1004; or

                    (IV) Disclosure of the content of
electronic communications of the user is reasonably necessary
for administration of the estate.

     2-3-1008.   Disclosure of other digital assets of a deceased
user.

     (a) Unless otherwise directed by a court order or a user
as specified in W.S. 2-3-1004, a custodian shall disclose to the
personal representative of the estate of a deceased user a
catalogue of electronic communications sent or received by the
user and digital assets of the user, other than the content of
electronic communications, if the representative provides the
custodian with the following:
          (i)    A request for disclosure in written or electronic
form;

          (ii)   A certified copy of the death certificate of the
user;

          (iii) A certified copy of the court order appointing
the personal representative; and

          (iv)   If requested by the custodian:

               (A) A number, username, address or other unique
subscriber or account identifier assigned by the custodian to
identify the user's account;

                 (B)   Evidence linking the account to the user;

               (C) An affidavit stating that disclosure of the
user's digital assets is reasonably necessary for administration
of the estate; or

               (D) A finding by a circuit court or other court
of competent jurisdiction that:

                    (I) The user had a specific account with
the custodian identifiable by the information specified in
subparagraph (A) of this paragraph; or

                    (II) Disclosure of the user's digital
assets is reasonably necessary for administration of the estate.

     2-3-1009. Disclosure of content of electronic
communications of a principal.

     (a) To the extent a power of attorney expressly grants an
agent authority over the content of electronic communications
sent or received by a principal and unless otherwise directed by
a court order or the principal as specified in W.S. 2-3-1004, a
custodian shall disclose to the agent the content of electronic
communications sent or received by the principal if the agent
provides the custodian with the following:

          (i)    A request for disclosure in written or electronic
form;
          (ii) An original or copy of the power of attorney
expressly granting the agent authority over the content of
electronic communications of the principal;

          (iii) A certification by the agent, under penalty of
perjury, that the power of attorney is in effect; and

          (iv)   If requested by the custodian:

               (A) A number, username, address or other unique
subscriber or account identifier assigned by the custodian to
identify the principal's account; or

                 (B)   Evidence linking the account to the
principal.

     2-3-1010.   Disclosure of other digital assets of a
principal.

     (a) Unless otherwise directed by a court order, a
principal as specified in W.S. 2-3-1004 or a power of attorney,
a custodian shall disclose to an agent a catalogue of electronic
communications sent or received by the principal and digital
assets of the principal, other than the content of electronic
communications, if the agent provides the custodian with the
following:

          (i)    A request for disclosure in written or electronic
form;

           (ii) An original or a copy of the power of attorney
that gives the agent specific authority over digital assets of
the principal or general authority to act on behalf of the
principal;

          (iii) A certification by the agent, under penalty of
perjury, that the power of attorney is in effect; and

          (iv)   If requested by the custodian:

               (A) A number, username, address or other unique
subscriber or account identifier assigned by the custodian to
identify the principal's account; or

                 (B)   Evidence linking the account to the
principal.
     2-3-1011. Disclosure of digital assets held in trust when
trustee is original user.

Unless otherwise directed by a court order or a trust, a
custodian shall disclose to a trustee who is an original user of
an account of the trust digital assets of the account, including
a catalogue of electronic communications of the trustee and the
content of electronic communications sent or received by the
trustee and carried, maintained, processed, received or stored
by the custodian in the account.

     2-3-1012. Disclosure of the content of electronic
communications held in trust when trustee not original user.

     (a) Unless otherwise directed by a court order, a user as
specified in W.S. 2-3-1004 or a trust, a custodian shall
disclose to a trustee who is not an original user of an account
of the trust the content of an electronic communication sent or
received by an original or successor user and carried,
maintained, processed, received or stored by the custodian in
the account if the trustee provides the custodian with the
following:

          (i)    A request for disclosure in written or electronic
form;

          (ii) A certification or affidavit of trust as
provided in W.S. 4-10-1014 that includes consent to disclosure
of the content of electronic communications to the trustee;

          (iii) A certification by the trustee, under penalty
of perjury, that the trust exists and the trustee is a currently
acting trustee of the trust; and

          (iv)   If requested by the custodian:

               (A) A number, username, address or other unique
subscriber or account identifier assigned by the custodian to
identify the trust's account; or

                 (B)   Evidence linking the account to the trust.

     2-3-1013. Disclosure of other digital assets held in trust
when trustee not original user.

     (a) Unless otherwise directed by a court order, a user as
specified in W.S. 2-3-1004 or a trust, a custodian shall
disclose to a trustee who is not an original user of an account
of a trust a catalogue of electronic communications sent or
received by an original or successor user and carried,
maintained, processed, received or stored by the custodian in
the account and digital assets in which the trust has a right or
interest, other than the content of electronic communications,
if the trustee provides the custodian with the following:

          (i)    A request for disclosure in written or electronic
form;

          (ii) A certification or affidavit of trust as
provided in W.S. 4-10-1014 that includes consent to disclosure
of the content of electronic communications to the trustee;

          (iii) A certification by the trustee, under penalty
of perjury, that the trust exists and the trustee is a currently
acting trustee of the trust; and

          (iv)   If requested by the custodian:

               (A) A number, username, address or other unique
subscriber or account identifier assigned by the custodian to
identify the trust's account; or

                 (B)   Evidence linking the account to the trust.

     2-3-1014.   Disclosure of digital assets to conservator of a
ward.

     (a) After an opportunity for a hearing under title 3,
chapter 2 of the Wyoming statutes, the court may grant a
conservator access to the digital assets of a ward.

     (b) Unless otherwise directed by a court order or a user
as specified in W.S. 2-3-1004, a custodian shall disclose to a
conservator the catalogue of electronic communications sent or
received by a ward and digital assets in which the ward has a
right or interest, other than the content of electronic
communications, if the conservator provides the custodian with
the following:

          (i)    A request for disclosure in written or electronic
form;
          (ii) A certified copy of the court order that gives
the conservator authority over the digital assets of the ward;
and

          (iii)    If requested by the custodian:

               (A) A number, username, address or other unique
subscriber or account identifier assigned by the custodian to
identify the account of the ward; or

                  (B)   Evidence linking the account to the ward.

     (c) A conservator with general authority to manage the
assets of a ward may request a custodian of the digital assets
of the ward to suspend or terminate an account of the ward for
good cause. A request made under this subsection shall be
accompanied by a certified copy of the court order that gives
the conservator authority over the ward's property.

     2-3-1015.    Fiduciary duty and authority.

     (a) The legal duties imposed on a fiduciary charged with
managing tangible, personal property of a decedent, ward,
principal or settlor apply to the management of digital assets,
including the duty of care, loyalty and confidentiality.

     (b) A fiduciary's or designated recipient's authority with
respect to digital assets of a user:

           (i) Unless otherwise directed by a user as specified
in W.S. 2-3-1004, is subject to the applicable terms of service
agreement;

          (ii)    Is subject to other applicable law;

          (iii) In the case of a fiduciary, is limited by the
scope of the fiduciary's duties; and

          (iv)    Shall not be used to impersonate the user.

     (c) A fiduciary with authority over the tangible, personal
property of a decedent, ward, principal or settlor has the right
to access digital assets in which the decedent, ward, principal
or settlor had a right or interest and which are not carried,
maintained, processed, received or stored by a custodian or
subject to a terms of service agreement.
     (d) A fiduciary acting within the scope of the fiduciary's
duties is an authorized user of the tangible, personal property
of the decedent, ward, principal or settlor for the purpose of
applicable computer fraud and unauthorized computer access laws,
including W.S. 40-25-101.

     (e) A fiduciary with authority over the tangible, personal
property of a decedent, ward, principal or settlor:

          (i) Has the right to access the property and any
digital asset stored in the property; and

          (ii) Is an authorized user for the purpose of
computer fraud and unauthorized computer access laws, including
W.S. 40-25-101.

     (f) A custodian may disclose information in an account to
a fiduciary of the user when the information is required to
terminate an account used to access digital assets licensed to
the user.

     (g) A fiduciary of a user may request a custodian to
terminate the user's account. A request for termination under
this subsection shall be in writing or electronic form and
accompanied by:

          (i) A copy of the death certificate of the user if
the user is deceased;

          (ii) A certified copy of the court order appointing
the personal representative or a certified copy of the court
order, power of attorney, trust or other authorization giving
the fiduciary authority over the account; and

          (iii)    If requested by the custodian:

               (A) A number, username, address or other unique
subscriber or account identifier assigned by the custodian to
identify the user's account;

                  (B)   Evidence linking the account to the user; or

               (C) A finding by a circuit court or other court
of competent jurisdiction that the user had a specific account
with the custodian identifiable by the information specified in
subparagraph (A) of this paragraph.
     2-3-1016.   Custodian compliance and immunity.

     (a) Not later than sixty (60) days after receipt of the
information required under W.S. 2-3-1007 through 2-3-1015, a
custodian shall comply with a request from a fiduciary or
designated recipient under this act to disclose digital assets
or terminate an account. If the custodian fails to comply, the
fiduciary or designated representative may apply to the circuit
court or other court of competent jurisdiction for an order
directing compliance.

     (b) An order under subsection (a) of this section
directing compliance shall contain a finding that compliance is
not in violation of section 2702 of title 18 of the United
States Code, as amended.

     (c) A custodian may notify the user that a request for
disclosure of digital assets or to terminate an account was made
under this act.

     (d) A custodian may deny a request from a fiduciary or
designated representative under this act to disclose digital
assets or to terminate an account if the custodian is aware of
any lawful access to the account following the receipt of the
fiduciary's or personal representative's request.

     (e) This act does not limit a custodian's ability to
obtain or require a fiduciary or designated representative
requesting disclosure of digital assets or termination of an
account under this act to obtain a court order that:

          (i)    Specifies the account belongs to the ward or
principal;

          (ii) Specifies there is sufficient consent from the
ward or principal to support the requested disclosure; and

          (iii) Contains a finding required by law in addition
to any finding required under this act.

     (f) A custodian and any officers, employees or agents of
the custodian are immune from liability for an act or omission
done in good faith to comply with the provisions of this act.

     2-3-1017. Relation to Electronic Signatures in Global and
National Commerce Act.
This act modifies, limits or supersedes the Electronic
Signatures in Global and National Commerce Act, section 7001 et
seq. of title 15 of the United States Code, as amended, but does
not modify, limit or supersede section 7001(c) of title 15 of
the United States Code, as amended, or authorize electronic
delivery of any of the notices described in section 7003(b) of
title 15 of the United States Code, as amended.

                   CHAPTER 4 - INTESTATE SUCCESSION

                         ARTICLE 1 - IN GENERAL

     2-4-101.   Rule of descent; generally; dower and curtesy
abolished.

     (a) Whenever any person having title to any real or
personal property having the nature or legal character of real
estate or personal estate undisposed of, and not otherwise
limited by marriage settlement, dies intestate, the estate shall
descend and be distributed in parcenary to his kindred, male and
female, subject to the payment of his debts, in the following
course and manner:

          (i) If the intestate leaves husband or wife and
children, or the descendents of any children surviving, one-half
(1/2) of the estate shall descend to the surviving husband or
wife, and the residue thereof to the surviving children and
descendents of children, as hereinafter limited;

          (ii) If the intestate leaves husband or wife and no
child nor descendents of any child, then the real and personal
estate of the intestate shall descend and vest in the surviving
husband or wife.

                  (A)   Repealed by Laws 1985, ch. 135, § 2.

                  (B)   Repealed by Laws 1985, ch. 135, § 2.

          (iii)    Repealed by Laws 1985, ch. 135, § 2.

     (b) Dower and the tenancy by the curtesy are abolished and
neither husband nor wife shall have any share in the estate of
the other dying intestate, save as herein provided.

     (c) Except in cases above enumerated, the estate of any
intestate shall descend and be distributed as follows:
          (i) To his children surviving, and the descendents of
his children who are dead, the descendents collectively taking
the share which their parents would have taken if living;

          (ii) If there are no children, nor their descendents,
then to his father, mother, brothers and sisters, and to the
descendents of brothers and sisters who are dead, the
descendents collectively taking the share which their parents
would have taken if living, in equal parts;

          (iii) If there are no children nor their descendents,
nor father, mother, brothers, sisters, nor descendents of
deceased brothers and sisters, nor husband nor wife, living,
then to the grandfather, grandmother, uncles, aunts and their
descendents, the descendents taking collectively, the share of
their immediate ancestors, in equal parts.

     2-4-102.   Repealed by Laws 2019, ch. 125, § 2.

     2-4-103.   Posthumous persons.

Persons conceived before the decedent's death but born
thereafter inherit as if they had been born in the lifetime of
the decedent.

     2-4-104.   Kindred of half blood; stepchildren; foster
children.

Persons of the half-blood inherit the same share they would
inherit if they were of the whole blood, but stepchildren and
foster children and their descendents do not inherit.

     2-4-105. Alienage not to affect inheritance; exception;
burden of proof; when property to escheat to state.

     (a) The alienage of the legal heirs shall not invalidate
any title to real estate which shall descend or pass from the
decedent, except that no nonresident alien who is a citizen of
any country foreign to the United States of America, shall by
any manner or means acquire real property in this state by
succession or testamentary disposition if the laws of the
country of which the nonresident alien is a citizen do not allow
citizens of the United States of America to take real property
by succession or by testamentary disposition.

     (b) If a decedent leaves no heirs, devisees or legatees
entitled to take real property under the terms of this act, the
decedent's property shall escheat to the state of Wyoming as now
provided by law for escheat property.

     (c) The burden of proof is upon a nonresident alien to
establish the existence of reciprocal rights asserted by him.

     2-4-106.   Divorce not to affect children's rights.

Divorces of husband and wife do not affect the right of children
to inherit their property.

     2-4-107.   Determination of relationship of parent and
child.

     (a) If for purposes of intestate succession, a
relationship of parent and child shall be established to
determine succession by, through or from a person:

          (i) An adopted person is the child of an adopting
parent for inheritance purposes, but the adoption of a child by
the spouse of a natural parent has no effect on the relationship
between the child and that natural parent for inheritance
purposes;

          (ii) An adopted person shall inherit from all other
relatives of an adoptive parent as though he was the natural
child of the adoptive parent and the relatives shall inherit
from the adoptive person's estate as if they were his relatives;

          (iii) In cases not covered by paragraph (i) of this
subsection, a person born out of wedlock is a child of the
mother. That person is also a child of the father, if the
relationship of parent and child has been established under the
Uniform Parentage Act, W.S. 14-2-401 through 14-2-907.

     2-4-108. Advancements generally; exceptions;
determination.

     (a) If a person dies intestate, property which he gave in
his lifetime to an heir is treated as an advancement against the
latter's share of the estate only if declared in a
contemporaneous writing by the decedent or acknowledged in
writing by the heir to be an advancement. For this purpose the
property advanced is valued as of the time the heir came into
possession or enjoyment of the property. If the recipient of the
property fails to survive the decedent, the property is not
taken into account in computing the intestate share to be
received by the recipient's issue, unless the declaration or
acknowledgment provides otherwise.

     (b) The maintenance, education or supply of money to a
minor, without any view to apportion or settlement in life, is
not deemed an advancement under this section.

     (c) When any heir of the intestate receives in his
lifetime any real or personal estate by way of advancement, and
the other heirs desire it to be charged to him, the judge shall
cite the parties to appear before him, shall hear proof upon the
subject, and shall determine the amount of such advancement or
advancements to be thus charged.

            ARTICLE 2 - PROCEDURE FOR ADMINISTRATION

     2-4-201.    Persons entitled to administer.

     (a) Administration of the estate of a person dying
intestate shall be granted to one (1) or more of the persons
mentioned in this section. The relatives of the deceased are
entitled to administer only when they are entitled to succeed to
his personal estate or some portion thereof. They are entitled
to administer in the following order:

          (i) The surviving husband or wife, or some competent
person whom he or she may request to have appointed;

          (ii)    The children;

          (iii)    The father or mother;

          (iv)    The brothers or sisters;

          (v)    Repealed by Laws 1987, ch. 129, §§ 1, 2.

          (vi)    The grandchildren;

          (vii) The next of kin entitled to share in the
distribution of the estate;

          (viii)    The creditors;

          (ix)    Any person legally competent.

     (b) If the decedent was a member of a partnership at the
time of his death, the surviving partner shall not be appointed
administrator of the estate if he is competent only by reason of
paragraphs (a)(viii) and (ix) of this section.

     (c) No nonresident of the state of Wyoming shall be
appointed as administrator unless a resident of Wyoming is
appointed as coadministrator.

     2-4-202.   Appointment of administrator(s).

Where there are several persons equally entitled to administer,
the court, or commissioner in vacation may grant letters to one
(1) or more of them. When a creditor is claiming letters, the
court, or commissioner in vacation, may at the request of
another creditor grant letters to any other person legally
competent.

     2-4-203.   Persons incompetent to administer.

     (a) No person is competent or entitled to serve as
administrator, who is:

          (i)   Under the age of majority;

          (ii) Not a bona fide resident of the state unless a
resident of Wyoming is appointed coadministrator; or

          (iii) Adjudged by the court or commissioner
incompetent to execute the duties of the trust.

     2-4-204.   Married woman may be administratrix.

A married woman may be appointed and serve as administratrix the
same in every respect as a femme sole. When an unmarried woman
appointed administratrix marries her authority is not
extinguished.

     2-4-205. Petition for letters of administration; contents;
effect of want of jurisdictional averments.

A petition for letters of administration shall be in writing,
signed by the applicant or his counsel and filed with the clerk
of the court. The petition shall state the facts essential to
give the court jurisdiction of the case, and when known to the
applicant, shall state the names, ages and residences of the
heirs of the decedent, the value and character of the property
and where the same is situated. If the jurisdictional facts
existed but are not fully set forth in the petition, and are
afterwards proved in the course of administration, the decree or
order of administration and subsequent proceedings are not void
on account of such want of jurisdictional averments.

     2-4-206.   Contest of petition; assertion of own rights to
administer.

Any person interested may contest the petition by filing written
opposition on the ground of the incompetency of the applicant,
or may assert his own rights to the administration and pray that
letters be issued to himself. In the latter case the contestant
shall file a petition and submit evidence in support thereof,
taken and reduced to writing before the clerk or commissioner of
the court, and the court shall hear the two (2) petitions
together.

     2-4-207.   Hearing of contest; issuance of letters.

After hearing the allegations and proofs of the parties, the
court shall order the issuing of letters of administration to
the party best entitled thereto.

     2-4-208.   When letters granted.

Letters of administration may be granted at any time appointed
for the hearing of the application, or at any time to which the
hearing is continued or postponed.

     2-4-209.   Letters granted to any applicant if not
contested.

Letters of administration shall be granted to any applicant,
though it appears there are other persons having better rights
to the administration, when those persons fail to appear either
in person or by agent or attorney and claim the issuing of
letters themselves.

     2-4-210.   Letters granted on request of person entitled.

Administration may be granted to one (1) or more competent
persons, although not otherwise entitled to the same, at the
written request of the person entitled, filed in court.

     2-4-211.   Creditors; right to apply for letters.

If letters testamentary or of administration have not been
issued upon the request of any other person, any creditor of the
decedent may apply for letters of administration at any time
within two (2) years after the death of decedent, but not
afterwards.

     2-4-212.    Creditors; when claims barred; effect on liens.

If the letters are not issued within the time specified, all
claims of creditors are forever barred and the purchasers of the
property of the decedent from the heirs of the decedent shall
take the title free from any claim of creditors. This act does
not affect the lien upon encumbered property secured by valid
mortgage or deed of trust in the case of real property, or by
security agreement or interest valid under the Wyoming Uniform
Commercial Code, but the secured creditor is not entitled to any
deficiency judgment.

     2-4-213.    Transcript of court minutes to be evidence of
appointment.

A transcript from the minutes of the court showing the
appointment of any person as administrator, together with the
certificate of the clerk under his hand and the seal of the
court, that the person has given bond and been qualified and
that letters of administration have been issued to him and have
not been revoked, shall have the same effect in evidence as the
letters themselves.

     2-4-214.    Form of letters of administration .

Letters of administration shall be signed by the clerk under the
seal of the court, and substantially in the following form:

State of Wyoming      )

                      )ss

County of ....        )

C. D. is hereby appointed administrator of the estate of A. B.,
deceased. Witness, G. H., clerk of the district court within
and for the county of .... with the seal thereto affixed, the
.... day of .... A. D. ....

     .... Clerk.

                CHAPTER 5 - RIGHTS OF SURVIVING SPOUSE
     2-5-101.   Elective share of property.

     (a) If a married person domiciled in this state shall by
will deprive the surviving spouse of more than the elective
share, as hereafter set forth, of the property which is subject
to disposition under the will, reduced by funeral and
administration expenses, homestead allowance, family allowances
and exemption, and enforceable claims, the surviving spouse has
a right of election to take an elective share of that property
as follows:

          (i) One-half (1/2) if there are no surviving issue of
the decedent, or if the surviving spouse is also a parent of any
of the surviving issue of the decedent; or

          (ii) One-fourth (1/4), if the surviving spouse is not
the parent of any surviving issue of the decedent.

     (b) If a married person not domiciled in this state dies,
the right, if any, of the surviving spouse to take an elective
share in property in this state is governed by the law of the
decedent's domicile at death.

     (c) If the surviving spouse of a married person domiciled
in this state dies or becomes incompetent within three (3)
months after the will is admitted to probate or before being
advised of the right of election as in W.S. 2-5-104 provided, a
personal representative or guardian of the estate of the
deceased or incompetent surviving spouse has the same right of
election as the surviving spouse would have had if living or
competent.

     (d) If the surviving spouse or his personal representative
or guardian fails to exercise the right of election within the
time provided in W.S. 2-5-105, the will shall govern and control
the distribution of the estate.

     2-5-102.   Waiver of right of election and homestead
allowance.

The right of election of a surviving spouse and the rights of
the surviving spouse to homestead allowance, exempt property and
family allowance, or any of them, may be waived totally or
partially before or after marriage, by a written contract,
agreement or waiver signed by the party waiving, after fair
disclosure. Unless it provides to the contrary a waiver of "all
rights" (or equivalent language) in the property or estate of a
present or prospective spouse, or a complete property settlement
entered into after or in anticipation of separation or divorce,
is a waiver of all rights to elective share, homestead
allowance, exempt property and family allowance by each spouse
in the property of the other and a renunciation by each of all
benefits which would otherwise pass to one from the other by
intestate succession or by virtue of the provisions of any will
executed before the waiver or property settlement.

     2-5-103. Homestead allowance, exempt property and family
allowance; exception.

A surviving spouse is entitled to homestead allowance, exempt
property and family allowance whether or not he elects to take
an elective share and whether or not he renounces the benefits
conferred upon him by the will except that, if it clearly
appears from the will that a provision therein made for the
surviving spouse is intended to be in lieu of these rights, he
is not so entitled if he does not renounce the provisions made
for him in the will.

     2-5-104.   Duty of court to advise as to right of election.

     (a) If the surviving spouse has a right of election under
W.S. 2-5-101, then at any time after the filing of an inventory
and not more than three (3) months after the admission of the
will to probate, the court shall advise the surviving spouse of
his right of election and shall explain fully the right and that
in the event of the failure to exercise the right of election
the will shall govern and control the distribution of the
estate.

     (b) If the surviving spouse dies or becomes incompetent
before the court has advised him of his right of election and
has not, prior to death or incompetency, filed a waiver or
renunciation of the right of election, the court shall advise
the personal representative or guardian of the estate of the
deceased or incompetent surviving spouse of the right of
election as provided in subsection (a) of this section.

     2-5-105.   Time limit and procedure for elective share.

     (a) The surviving spouse, or a personal representative or
guardian of the estate of a deceased or incompetent surviving
spouse, may elect to take his elective share in the estate by
filing in the court and mailing or delivering to the personal
representative, if any, a petition for the elective share within
three (3) months after the admission of the will to probate or
within thirty (30) days after being advised of the right of
election, whichever limitation last expires. In the event of a
failure to file a petition within the foregoing time limitation
the will governs and controls the distribution of the estate.

     (b) After the filing of a petition to elect to take an
elective share, the court shall set the petition for hearing and
the surviving spouse, or his personal representative or
guardian, shall give notice by certified mail not less than
twenty (20) days before the date of hearing of the time and
place set for hearing to all persons whose interest will be
adversely affected by the taking of the elective share.

     (c) After notice and hearing the court shall determine the
right to the elective share and shall order its payment from
assets of the estate. An assignment or allotment of assets by
the personal representative to the elective share need not be
made until the entry of a decree of distribution or such other
time as may be designated by the court.

     (d) The surviving spouse or his personal representative or
guardian may withdraw his demand for an elective share at any
time before entry of a final determination by the court of the
right to an elective share.

     (e) Any time after having been advised of the right of
election, the surviving spouse or his personal representative or
guardian may file with the court a renunciation or waiver of the
right of election in which event the will shall govern and
control the distribution of the estate.

                         CHAPTER 6 - WILLS

                      ARTICLE 1 - IN GENERAL

     2-6-101.   Right to make and dispose; exception.

Any person of legal age and sound mind may make a will and
dispose of all of his property by will except what is sufficient
to pay his debts, and subject to the rights of the surviving
spouse and children.

     2-6-102.   All property deemed passed; "property" defined.

A will is construed to pass all property which the testator owns
at his death including property acquired after the execution of
the will, unless a contrary intention is indicated by the will.
"Property", as used in this section, includes both real and
personal property, or any interest therein, and means anything
that may be the subject of ownership.

     2-6-103.   Property passed may be governed by trust
instrument.

By a will signed and attested as provided in this article a
testator may devise and bequeath real and personal estate to a
trustee of a trust which is evidenced by a written instrument in
existence when the will is made and which is identified in the
will, even though the trust is subject to amendment,
modification, revocation or termination. Unless the will
provides otherwise the estate so devised and bequeathed is
governed by the terms and provisions of the instrument creating
the trust including any amendments or modifications in writing
made before or after the making of the will and before the death
of the testator.

     2-6-104.   Law governing meaning and effect.

The meaning and legal effect of a disposition in a will is
determined by the law of the state in which the will was
executed, unless the will otherwise provides or unless the
application of that law is contrary to the public policy of this
state otherwise applicable to the disposition.

     2-6-105.   Rules of construction and intention.

The intention of a testator as expressed in his will controls
the legal effect of his dispositions. The rules of construction
expressed in the succeeding sections of this article apply
unless a contrary intention is indicated by the will.

     2-6-106.   Antilapse; deceased devisees; class gifts.

If a devisee who is a grandparent or a lineal descendent of a
grandparent of the testator is dead at the time of execution of
the will, fails to survive the testator, or is treated as if he
predeceased the testator, the issue of the deceased devisee take
in place of the deceased devisee and if they are all of the same
degree of kinship to the devisee they take equally, but if of
unequal degree then those of more remote degree take per
stirpes. One who would have been a devisee under a class gift if
he had survived the testator is treated as a devisee for
purposes of this section whether his death occurred before or
after the execution of the will.

     2-6-107.   Failure of a testamentary provision.

     (a) Except as provided in W.S. 2-6-106, if a devise other
than a residuary devise fails for any reason, it becomes a part
of the residue.

     (b) Except as provided in W.S. 2-6-106, if the residue is
devised to two (2) or more persons and the share of one (1) of
the residuary devisees fails for any reason, his share passes to
the residuary devisee, or to other residuary devisees in
proportion to their interests in the residue.

     2-6-108.   Specific devise of securities; accessions;
nonademption.

     (a) If the testator intended a specific devise of certain
securities rather than the equivalent value thereof, the
specific devisee is entitled only to:

          (i) As much of the devised securities as are a part
of the estate at time of the testator's death;

          (ii) Any additional or other securities of the same
entity owned by the testator by reason of action initiated by
the entity excluding any acquired by exercise of purchase
options;

          (iii) Securities of another entity owned by the
testator as a result of a merger, consolidation, reorganization
or other similar action initiated by the entity; and

          (iv) Any additional securities of the entity owned by
the testator as a result of a plan of reinvestment.

     (b) Distributions prior to death with respect to a
specifically devised security not provided for in subsection (a)
of this section are not part of the specific devise.

     2-6-109. Nonademption of specific devises where sold by
conservator; exception; rights of specific devisee.

     (a) If specifically devised property is sold by a
conservator, or if a condemnation award or insurance proceeds
are paid to a conservator as a result of a condemnation, fire or
casualty, the specific devisee has the right to a general
pecuniary devise equal to the net sale price, the condemnation
award or the insurance proceeds. This subsection does not apply
if after the sale, condemnation or casualty, it is adjudicated
that the disability of the testator has ceased and the testator
survives the adjudication by one (1) year. The right of the
specific devisee under this subsection is reduced by any right
he has under subsection (b) of this section.

     (b) A specific devisee has the right to the remaining
specifically devised property and:

          (i) Any balance of the purchase price together with
any security interest owing from a purchaser to the testator at
death by reason of sale of the property;

          (ii) Any amount of a condemnation award for the
taking of the property unpaid at death;

          (iii) Any proceeds unpaid at death on a fire or
casualty insurance on the property; and

          (iv) Property owned by testator at his death as a
result of foreclosure, or obtained in lieu of foreclosure, of
the security for a specifically devised obligation.

     2-6-110.   Exercise of power of appointment.

A general residuary clause in a will, or a will making general
disposition of all of the testator's property, does not exercise
a power of appointment held by the testator unless specific
reference is made to the power or there is some other indication
of intention to include the property subject to the power.

     2-6-111.   Nonexoneration.

A specific devise passes subject to any mortgage, security,
interest or lien existing at the date of death, without right of
exoneration, regardless of a general directive in the will to
pay debts.

     2-6-112. Will to be in writing; number and competency of
witnesses; signature of testator; subscribing witness not to
benefit; exception.

     (a) Except as provided in W.S. 2-6-113, all wills to be
valid shall be in writing, or typewritten, witnessed by two (2)
competent witnesses and signed by the testator or by some person
in his presence and by his express direction. If the witnesses
are competent at the time of attesting the execution of the
will, their subsequent incompetency shall not prevent the
probate and allowance of the will. No subscribing witness to any
will can derive any benefit therefrom unless there are two (2)
disinterested and competent witnesses to the same, but if
without a will the witness would be entitled to any portion of
the testator's estate, the witness may still receive the portion
to the extent and value of the amount devised.

     (b) Witnesses to a will may appear in person or by the use
of audio-video communication technology, provided that the
witnesses can see and hear the testator in real time, have the
opportunity to judge the competency of the testator, have the
ability to securely sign the will electronically and can
determine that the testator is freely and voluntarily signing
and executing the will.

     2-6-113.   Holographic will.

A will which does not comply with W.S. 2-6-112 is valid as an
holographic will, whether or not witnessed, if it is entirely in
the handwriting of the testator and signed by the hand of the
testator himself.

     2-6-114.   Self-proving wills.

     (a) Any will may be simultaneously executed, attested and
made self-proven, by the acknowledgment thereof by the testator
and the affidavits of the witnesses, each made before an officer
authorized to administer oaths under the laws of the state where
execution occurs and evidenced by the officer's certificate
under official seal, in form and content substantially as
follows:

I, ...., the testator, sign my name to this instrument this ....
day of ...., (year), and being first duly sworn, do hereby
declare to the undersigned authority that I sign and execute
this instrument as my last will and that I sign it willingly (or
willingly direct another to sign for me), that I execute it as
my free and voluntary act for the purposes therein expressed,
and that I am an adult person, of sound mind, and under no
constraint or undue influence.

Testator........
We, ...., .... the witnesses, sign (or electronically sign by
secure means) our names to this instrument, being first duly
sworn, and do hereby declare to the undersigned authority that
the testator signs and executes this instrument as his last will
and that he signs it willingly (or willingly directs another to
sign for him), and that he executes it as his free and voluntary
act for the purposes therein expressed, and that each of us, in
the presence and hearing of the testator (or appearing through
the use of audio-video communication technology and able to see
and hear the testator in real time), hereby signs this will (or
electronically signs this will by secure means) as witnesses to
the testator's signature and that to the best of our knowledge
the testator is an adult person, of sound mind, and under no
constraint or undue influence.

                              Witness ................

                              Witness ................

STATE OF WYOMING    )

                    ) ss

COUNTY OF           )

Subscribed, sworn to and acknowledged before me by ...., the
testator, and subscribed and sworn to before me by .... and
...., witnesses, this .... day of .... .

(SEAL)                             (Signed) ...............

(Official Capacity of Officer) .......................

     (b) The execution of the acknowledgment by the testator
and the affidavits of the witnesses as provided for in this
section shall be sufficient to satisfy the requirements of the
signing of the will by the testator and the witnesses under W.S.
2-6-112.

     (c) An attested will may at the time of its execution or
at any subsequent date be made self-proven by the acknowledgment
thereof by the testator and the affidavits of the witnesses,
each made before an officer authorized to administer oaths under
the laws of this state or under the laws of the state where
execution occurs, and evidenced by the officer's certificate
under official seal, attached or annexed to the will in form and
contents substantially as follows:
STATE OF WYOMING     )

                     ) ss

COUNTY OF            )

We, ...., ...., and ...., the testator and the witnesses,
respectively, whose names are signed to the attached or
foregoing instrument, being first duly sworn, do hereby declare
to the undersigned authority that the testator signed and
executed the instrument as his last will and that he signed
willingly or willingly directed another to sign for him, and
that he executed it as his free and voluntary act for the
purposes therein expressed; and that each of the witnesses, in
the presence and hearing of the testator (or appearing through
the use of audio-video communication technology and able to see
and hear the testator in real time), signed the will (or
electronically signed the will by secure means) as witness and
that to the best of our knowledge the testator was at that time
an adult person, of sound mind and under no constraint or undue
influence.

                                    Testator ........

Witness .....................

Witness .....................

Subscribed, sworn to and acknowledged before me by ...., the
testator, and subscribed and sworn to before me by .... and
...., witnesses, this .... day of ...., ... .

(SEAL)               (Signed) ..............

(Official Capacity of Officer)

     2-6-115.   Who may witness.

Any person generally competent to be a witness may act as a
witness to a will.

     2-6-116.   Validity of execution.

A written will is valid if executed in compliance with W.S.
2-6-112 or 2-6-113 or if its execution complies with the law at
the time of execution of the place where the will is executed,
or of the law of the place where at the time of execution or at
the time of death the testator is domiciled, has a place of
abode or is a national.

     2-6-117.   Revocation by writing or by act.

     (a)   A will or any part thereof is revoked:

          (i) By a subsequent will which revokes the prior will
or part expressly or by inconsistence; or

           (ii) By being burned, torn, cancelled, obliterated or
destroyed with the intent and for the purpose of revoking it by
the testator or by another person in his presence and by his
direction.

     2-6-118.   Repealed by Laws 2023, ch. 140, § 2.

     2-6-119. Duty of custodian to deliver will; failure to
comply; order to third persons.

     (a) Every custodian of a will, within ten (10) days after
receipt of information that the maker thereof is dead, shall
deliver the same to the clerk of the district court having
jurisdiction of the estate or to the executor named therein. A
failure to comply with the provisions of this section makes the
person failing responsible for all damages sustained by anyone
injured thereby.

     (b) If it is brought to the attention of the court that
any will is in the possession of a third person, and the court
or the commissioner is satisfied that the information is
correct, an order shall be issued and served upon the person
having possession of the will, and if he neglects or refuses to
produce it in obedience to the order he may be punished by the
court for contempt.

     2-6-120. Notification of executor; disposition where no
petition filed.

Upon receipt of a will for filing, with information that the
maker thereof is dead, the clerk shall notify the party, if any,
named as executor of the will, and as many of the distributees
named therein as may be readily located. If no action pursuant
to W.S. 2-6-121, 2-6-122 or 2-6-201 is taken by any party within
thirty (30) days after the giving of such notice, the clerk
shall report the matter to the court and the court may make
orders as it deems appropriate for the disposition of the will.

     2-6-121. Petition and procedure for filing of will without
probate or administration.

     (a) Concurrently with the filing with the clerk of a will
of a deceased person, or at any time thereafter, the executor or
any distributee named therein may file a sworn petition for
filing of the will without probate or administration. The
petition shall show:

          (i) The date and place of death of the decedent, and
county and state of last residence of the decedent;

          (ii) The names, ages and residences of the heirs and
devisees of the decedent, so far as known to the petitioner;

          (iii) That a true copy of the will and a true copy of
the petition have been mailed to each of the heirs and devisees;
and

          (iv) That, pending possible subsequent action, the
petition and the will are to be filed and indexed by the clerk,
without further proceedings.

     (b) The clerk shall receive, file and index the petition,
and annex the will thereto, and maintain same as part of the
permanent files. No filing fee shall be charged.

     (c) No proceedings under this section may be commenced
after the filing of a petition under W.S. 2-6-122 or 2-6-201,
nor after the entry of an order by the court pursuant to W.S.
2-6-120 making other provisions for the disposition of the will.

     2-6-122. Petition and procedure for filing and probate of
will without administration.

     (a) Concurrently with the filing with the clerk of a will
of a deceased person, or at any time thereafter prior to the
filing of a petition pursuant to W.S. 2-6-201 and prior to the
entry of any order by the court pursuant to W.S. 2-6-120 making
other provisions for the disposition of the will, any party who
would be entitled to letters testamentary under the provisions
of W.S. 2-6-208 may file with the clerk a sworn petition for
probate of will without administration. The petition shall show:
          (i) The date and place of death of the decedent, and
county and state of last residence of the decedent;

          (ii) The names, ages and residences of the heirs and
devisees of the decedent;

          (iii) That a true copy of the will and a true copy of
the petition have been mailed to each of the heirs and devisees;
and

          (iv) That the petition prays for probate of the will,
without administration.

     (b) A filing fee for the petition shall be charged, equal
to the minimum fee applicable to proceedings under W.S. 2-6-203.

     (c) Upon the filing of the petition, proceedings shall be
had as provided in W.S. 2-6-203 through 2-6-206, and order shall
issue and notices be given as provided in W.S. 2-6-209 if the
will is found entitled to probate, except that the order shall
not include the appointment of an executor, but recite that the
will is admitted to probate without administration.

     (d) After the entry of the order admitting the will to
probate, the petitioner shall, at his own expense, cause to be
published once a week for three (3) consecutive weeks in a daily
or weekly newspaper of general circulation in the county in
which the probate was granted a notice in substantially the
following form:

State of Wyoming     )

                     )             In the District Court

                     )             ....Judicial District

County of....        )                  Probate No. ....

In the Matter of the)                 Notice of Proof of

Estate of            )                       Will Without

                     )                      Administration

......., Deceased.   )

TO ALL PERSONS INTERESTED IN SAID ESTATE:
     You are hereby notified that on the .... day of ....,
(year), the Last Will and Testament of Decedent was admitted to
probate by the above named court and there will be no present
administration of the estate. Any action to set aside the Will
shall be filed in the Court within three (3) months from the
date of the first publication of this notice, or thereafter be
forever barred.

Dated ...., (year).

Proponent .............

PUBLISH:   (once a week for three (3) consecutive weeks)

     (e) The provisions of W.S. 2-6-301 through 2-6-306 apply
to proceedings under this section.

     (f) In the event administration of the estate is desired
at any later date, any party designated in W.S. 2-6-208, in the
order of preference set forth therein, may petition the court
for the issuance of letters testamentary.

     2-6-123. Filing of will, with or without probate not to
bar collection by affidavit.

No proceedings pursuant to W.S. 2-6-120 through 2-6-122 shall
bar any proceedings pursuant to W.S. 2-1-201 through 2-1-203.

     2-6-124. Written statement referred to in will disposing
of certain personal property.

     (a) A will may refer to a written statement or list to
dispose of items of tangible personal property not otherwise
specifically disposed of by the will, other than money,
evidences of indebtedness, documents of title, securities and
property used in trade or business. To be admissible under this
section as evidence of the intended disposition, the writing
shall:

           (i)   Be dated;

          (ii)    Be in the handwriting of the testator or signed
by him; and

          (iii) Include a description of the items and devisees
with reasonable certainty.
     (b) The written statement or list may be prepared before
or after execution of the will, and may be altered by the
testator after its preparation which alteration shall be signed
and dated by the testator.

     (c) The written statement or list may be a writing which
has no significance apart from the effect upon the disposition
made by the will.

     2-6-125. Revocation of probate and nonprobate transfers by
divorce or annulment; effect; revival; other changes excluded.

     (a)   As used in this section:

          (i) "Divorce" or "annulment" means any dissolution of
marriage through a divorce or annulment that results in the
exclusion of the spouse as a surviving spouse for purposes of
probate and nonprobate transfers upon death of the spouse. A
decree of separation that does not terminate the status of
spouses is not a divorce or annulment for purposes of this
section;

          (ii) "Divorced person" means a person who has
divorced from the person's spouse or whose marriage has been
annulled;

          (iii) "Governing instrument" means an instrument
executed by a divorced person before the divorce or annulment of
the marriage to the person's former spouse that the divorced
person could have revoked or amended;

          (iv) "Relative of the divorced person's former
spouse" or "former spouse's relative" means any person who is
related to the divorced person's former spouse by blood,
adoption or affinity and who, after the divorce or annulment, is
not related to the divorced person by blood, adoption or
affinity;

          (v) "Revocable" means a disposition, appointment,
provision or nomination under which the divorced person, at the
time of the divorce or annulment, was alone empowered by law or
under the terms of a governing instrument to cancel the
designation in favor of the divorced person's former spouse or
former spouse's relative regardless of whether the divorced
person was then empowered to designate himself in place of his
former spouse or former spouse's relative and regardless of
whether the divorced person then had the capacity to exercise
the power of designation.

     (b) Unless the express terms of a governing instrument
provide for the disposition to a former spouse after divorce or
unless a governing law, court order or contract relating to the
division of the marital estate made between two (2) divorced
persons before or after the marriage, divorce or annulment
states otherwise, the divorce or annulment of a marriage shall
immediately:

          (i)   Revoke any revocable:

               (A) Disposition or appointment of property made
by a divorced person to the former spouse in a governing
instrument;

               (B) Disposition or appointment created by law or
in a governing instrument to a relative of the divorced person's
former spouse;

               (C) Provision in a governing instrument that
confers a general or special power of appointment on the
divorced person's former spouse or on a relative of the divorced
person's former spouse;

               (D) Nomination in a governing instrument that
nominates the divorced person's former spouse or a relative of
the divorced person's former spouse to serve in any fiduciary or
representative capacity including a personal representative,
executor, trustee, conservator, agent or guardian.

          (ii) Sever the interests of the former spouse in
property held by the divorced person and the former spouse at
the time of the divorce or annulment as joint tenants with the
right of survivorship and property held as tenants by the
entirety. Property interests of the divorced person and former
spouse severed under this paragraph shall become tenancies in
common.

     (c) A severance of interests under paragraph (b)(ii) of
this section shall not affect any third-party interest in
property acquired for value and in good faith reliance on an
apparent title by survivorship in the survivor or in the name of
the survivor of the former spouse of the divorced person unless
a writing declaring the severance has been noted, registered,
filed or recorded prior to the third party gaining an interest
in the property in records appropriate to the kind and location
of the property that are relied upon in the ordinary course of
transactions involving property that are evidence of ownership.

     (d) Upon entry of an order of a divorce or annulment,
provisions of a governing instrument shall be given effect as if
the former spouse and relatives of the former spouse disclaimed
all interests revoked by this section. For nominations in a
fiduciary or representative capacity revoked by this section,
provisions of a governing instrument shall be given effect as if
the former spouse and relatives of the former spouse died
immediately before the divorce or annulment.

     (e) Provisions that are revoked solely by operation of
this section shall be revived upon the divorced person's
remarriage to the former spouse unless revival is specifically
prohibited by a prenuptial or other written agreement signed by
both parties.

     (f) No change of circumstances other than as described in
this section revokes a will.

     (g) A payor or other third party is not liable for having
made a payment or transferred an item of property or any other
benefit to a beneficiary designated in a governing instrument
affected by a divorce, annulment or remarriage, or for having
taken any other action in good faith reliance on the validity of
the governing instrument, unless the payor or other third party
received reasonable written notice of the divorce, annulment or
remarriage. A payor or other third party shall not have a duty
or obligation to inquire as to the continued marital
relationship between a divorced person and a beneficiary or to
seek any evidence with respect to a marital relationship.
Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to deprive the
rightful owner of any funds, item of property or other benefit
from seeking to recover the payment, item of property or other
benefit from the wrongful recipient of that payment, item of
property or other benefit.

                  ARTICLE 2 - PROCEDURE FOR PROBATE

     2-6-201. Contents of petition; defect in jurisdictional
statement inconsequential.

     (a)   A petition for the probate of a will shall show:

           (i)   The jurisdictional facts;
          (ii) Whether the person named as executor consents to
act, or renounces his right to letters testamentary;

          (iii) The names, ages and residences of the heirs and
devisees of the decedent, so far as known to the petitioner;

          (iv)    The probable value and character of the property
of the estate;

          (v) The name of the person for whom letters
testamentary are prayed.

     (b) No defect of form or in the statement of
jurisdictional facts actually existing shall make void the
probate of a will.

     2-6-202. Failure of executor to petition; appointment of
administrator.

If the person named in a will as executor, for thirty (30) days
after he has knowledge of the death of the testator and that he
is named as executor, fails to petition the proper court for
probate of the will and that letters testamentary be issued to
him, he may be held to have renounced his right to letters and
the court may appoint any other competent person administrator
unless good cause for delay is shown.

     2-6-203.    Hearing upon petition; notice not required.

     (a) Upon the filing of a petition for probate of a will,
the court or the clerk may hear it forthwith or at such time and
place as the court or clerk may direct, with or without
requiring notice, and upon proof of due execution of the will,
admit the same to probate.

     (b) Notice is not required and there shall be no delay in
the hearing, unless good cause appears.

     2-6-204.    Proof; self-proving will.

A will executed in compliance with W.S. 2-6-114 shall be
probated without further proof.

     2-6-205.    Proof; wills not self-proving.
     (a) If the will is not self-proving, proof of a will may
be made by the oral or written testimony of one or more of the
subscribing witnesses to the will. If the testimony is in
writing, it shall be substantially in the following form,
executed and sworn to contemporaneously with the execution of
the will or at any time thereafter, whether before or after the
date of death of the testator:

                In the District Court of Wyoming

           In and for .................... County

In the Matter of the Estate of)            Probate No. ....

.... Deceased                   )   Testimony of Subscribing

State of                        )ss Witness on Probate of Will

.... County                     )

     I, ...., being first duly sworn, state:

I reside in the County of ...., State of ....; I knew the
testator on the ... day of ..., (year), the date of the
instrument, the original or exact reproduction of which is
attached hereto, now shown to me, and purporting to be the last
will and testament of the said ....; I am one of the subscribing
witnesses to said instrument; and on the said date of said
instrument, I knew ...., the other subscribing witness; and said
instrument was exhibited to me and to the other subscribing
witness by the testator, who declared the same to be his last
will and testament, and was signed by the testator at ...., in
the County of ...., State of ...., on the date shown in said
instrument, in the presence of myself and the other subscribing
witness; and the other subscribing witness and I then and there,
at the request of the testator, in the presence of said testator
and in the presence of each other, subscribed our names thereto
as witnesses.

Name of witness ....

Address ....

Subscribed and sworn to before me this .... day of...., (year).

Notary Public in and for ....
County of ....

State of ....

(SEAL)

     (b) If it is desired to prove the execution of the will by
deposition rather than by use of the affidavit form provided in
subsection (a) of this section, upon application the clerk shall
issue a commission to some officer authorized by the law of this
state to take depositions, with the will annexed, and the
officer taking the deposition shall exhibit it to the witness
for identification, and, when identified by him, shall mark it
as "Exhibit ...." and cause the witness to connect his
identification with it as such exhibit. Before sending out the
commission the clerk shall make and retain in his office a true
copy of the will.

     (c) If all of the witnesses are deceased or otherwise not
available, it is permissible to prove the will by the sworn
testimony of two (2) credible disinterested witnesses that the
signature to the will is in the handwriting of the person whose
will it purports to be, and that the signatures of the witnesses
are in the handwriting of the witnesses, or it may be proved by
other sufficient evidence of the execution of the will.

     2-6-206.    Proof; holographic wills.

An holographic will may be proved the same as any other private
writing.

     2-6-207. Proof; lost or destroyed will; court may restrain
personal representatives pending disposition.

     (a) Whenever any will is lost or destroyed, the district
court shall take proof of the execution and validity thereof to
establish the same. All the testimony shall be reduced to
writing and signed by the witnesses.

     (b) No will shall be proved as a lost or destroyed will
unless it is proved to have been in existence at the time of
death of the testator, or is shown to have been fraudulently
destroyed in the lifetime of the testator, nor unless its
provisions are clearly and distinctly proved by at least two (2)
credible witnesses.
     (c) When a lost will is established, the provisions
thereof shall be distinctly stated and certified by the judge,
under his hand and the seal of the court, and the certificate
shall be filed and recorded as other wills are filed and
recorded, and letters testamentary or of administration with the
will annexed, shall be issued thereon in the same manner as upon
wills produced and duly proved.

     (d) If before or during the pendency of an application to
prove a lost or destroyed will, letters of administration are
granted on the estate of the testator or letters testamentary of
any previous will of the testator are granted, the court may
restrain the personal representatives so appointed from any acts
or proceedings which would be injurious to the legatees or
devisees claiming under the lost or destroyed will.

     2-6-208.    Order of preference for appointment of executor.

     (a) Letters testamentary may be granted to one or more
persons found to be qualified. Preference for appointment shall
be in the following order:

          (i)    The person designated in the will;

          (ii) Any beneficiary named in the will, or a person
nominated by the beneficiaries;

          (iii) Any creditor of the decedent, or a person
nominated by such creditor;

          (iv)    Such other person as the court may find to be
qualified.

     2-6-209.    Order admitting or disallowing probate; mailing
of copies.

The court or the clerk shall enter an order either admitting the
will to probate or disallowing probate because of insufficient
proof. An order admitting a will to probate shall include the
appointment of an executor. The clerk, personal representative
or attorney shall transmit by certified mail a copy of the order
admitting the will to probate, together with a copy of the will,
to each named beneficiary and to each heir of the decedent.

     2-6-210.    Form of letters testamentary.
Letters testamentary must be substantially in the following
form:

State of Wyoming      )

                      )ss

County of ....        )

     The last will of A. B., deceased, a copy of which is hereto
attached, having been proved and recorded in the district court
within and for the county of ...., C. D. is hereby appointed
executor. Witness, G. H., clerk of the district court of the
.... district within and for the county of .... with the seal of
the court affixed, the .... day of .... A.D. ....

.............................Clerk.

     2-6-211.    Authority of executor not designated in will.

Executors who are not designated in the will have the same
authority over the estates which executors named in the will
have.

           ARTICLE 3 - ACTIONS TO SET ASIDE OR CONTEST

     2-6-301.    Filing and contents of petition to revoke.

After a will has been admitted to probate, any person interested
may, within the time designated in the notice provided for in
W.S. 2-6-122 or 2-7-201, contest the will or the validity of the
will. For that purpose he shall file in the court in which the
will was proved a petition in writing containing his allegations
against the validity of the will or against the sufficiency of
the proof, and praying that the probate be revoked.

     2-6-302.    Summons and notification; proceedings governed by
civil rules.

Upon filing the petition, a summons shall be served upon the
executors of the will and the clerk shall send notice by
certified mail, with copy of petition attached, to all the
legatees and devisees mentioned in the will and all the heirs,
so far as known to the petitioner, or to their guardians if any
of them are minors, or to their personal representatives if any
of them are dead. The summons, service and proceedings shall be
governed by the Wyoming Rules of Civil Procedure.
     2-6-303.   Annulment and revocation.

If upon trial, the jury, or if no jury, the court decides the
will is invalid or that it is not sufficiently proved to be the
last will of the testator, the probate shall be annulled and
revoked.

     2-6-304.   Cessation of executor's powers; immunity.

Upon the revocation being made, the powers of the executor
cease, but the executor is not liable for any act done in good
faith previous to the revocation.

     2-6-305.   Liability for payment of contest costs.

The fees and expenses shall be paid by the party contesting the
validity or probate of the will if the will in probate is
affirmed. If the probate is revoked, the costs shall be paid by
the party who resisted the revocation, or out of the property of
the decedent, as the court directs.

     2-6-306.   When probate deemed conclusive.

If no person within the time designated in the notice provided
for in W.S. 2-6-122 or 2-7-201 files a petition to contest the
will or its validity, the probate of the will is conclusive.

                CHAPTER 7 - ADMINISTRATION OF ESTATES

                       ARTICLE 1 - IN GENERAL

     2-7-101.   Presumption of death; how estate handled.

When any person leaves his usual place of abode and is not seen
or heard from by his relatives or other persons reasonably
expected to hear from him for a period of seven (7) years, the
person is presumed to be dead. If the person owned real or
personal property in Wyoming, administration of the estate of
the person may be had in the manner provided by law.

     2-7-102. Penalty for administering without proving will or
taking letters of administration.

Any person, except one acting under the provisions of W.S.
2-1-201 and 2-1-202, who administers the personal estate of any
person dying after the passage of this act, or any part thereof,
without proving the will of the deceased or taking out letters
of administration of such personal estate, shall be punished by
imprisonment in the county jail not more than one (1) year or by
a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or both.

     2-7-103.   Personal representative to take possession of
estate.

The personal representative shall take possession of all of the
estate of the decedent, real and personal, and collect all debts
due the decedent or the estate. For the purpose of bringing suit
to quiet title or for partition of the estate, the possession of
the personal representative is the possession of the
distributees. Possession by the distributees is subject to the
possession of the personal representative for the purposes of
administration as applied to this chapter.

     2-7-104. Actions maintainable by or against personal
representatives; right generally.

Actions for the recovery of any property, real or personal, or
for the possession thereof, or for the destruction, wasting,
conversion, injury, taking or carrying away thereof, or to quiet
title thereto, or to determine any adverse claim thereon, and
all actions founded upon contract, may be maintained by and
against the personal representative in all cases in which the
action might have been maintained by or against their respective
testators or intestates.

     2-7-105. Actions maintainable by or against personal
representatives; actions for waste by representatives.

Personal representatives may maintain actions against any person
who has wasted, destroyed, taken or carried away, or converted
to his own use, the goods of their testator or intestate in his
lifetime. They may also maintain actions for trespass committed
on the real estate of the decedent in his lifetime.

     2-7-106. Actions maintainable by or against personal
representatives; actions for waste by representatives; against
representatives.

Any person or his personal representative may maintain an action
against the personal representative of any testator or intestate
who in his lifetime has wasted, destroyed, taken or carried
away, or converted to his own use, the goods or chattels of any
person, or committed any trespass on the real estate of the
person, provided the person claiming to be damaged by the
tortious acts of the decedent files a claim for the amount of
the damages within the time limited in the notice to creditors,
and the claim is rejected.

     2-7-107.   Disposition of partnership business.

When a partnership exists between the decedent at the time of
his death and any other person or persons, the surviving partner
or partners may continue in possession of the partnership and
settle its business, but the interest of the decedent in the
partnership shall be included in the inventory and appraised as
other property. The surviving partner or partners shall settle
the affairs of the partnership without delay, account to the
personal representative and pay the funds as from time to time
are payable to him, in the right of the decedent.

     2-7-108.   Actions on bond of former representatives.

A personal representative may, in his own name, for the use and
benefit of all parties interested in the estate, maintain
actions on the bond of any former personal representative or
special order for the same estate.

     2-7-109.   Compromise of claims; owed to estate.

When it appears for the best interest of the estate, the
fiduciary may, subject to approval of the court, effect a
compromise with any debtor or other obligor, or extend, renew or
in any other manner modify the terms of any obligation owing to
the estate. If the fiduciary holds a mortgage, pledge or other
lien upon property of another person, he may, in lieu of
foreclosure, accept a conveyance or transfer of the encumbered
assets from the owner thereof in satisfaction of the
indebtedness secured by the lien, if it appears for the best
interests of the estate and if the court so orders.

     2-7-110.   Compromise of claims; against estate.

When a claim against an estate has been filed, or suit thereon
is pending, the creditor and the fiduciary may, if it appears
for the best interests of the estate, subject to approval of the
court, compromise the claim, whether it is due or not due,
absolute or contingent, liquidated or unliquidated.

                        ARTICLE 2 - NOTICES
     2-7-201. Admission of will or estate to probate and
appointment of personal representative; contents; form.

Upon admission of a will or an estate of an intestate decedent
to probate and issuance of letters, the personal representative
shall cause to be published once a week for three (3)
consecutive weeks in a daily or weekly newspaper of general
circulation in the county in which the probate is pending, a
notice of admission of the will or estate to probate and of the
appointment of the personal representative. The notice shall
state that any action to set aside the probate of the will shall
be brought within three (3) months from the date of the first
publication of the notice or thereafter be barred. The
publication shall include a notice to debtors to make payment
and to creditors having claims against the decedent to file them
with the necessary vouchers in the office of the clerk of court
from which the letters were issued within three (3) months from
the date of the first publication of the notice, or thereafter
be forever barred. The notice required by this section shall be
substantially in the following form:

State of Wyoming         )         In the District Court

                         )ss       ....Judicial District

County of ....           )             Probate No. ....

In the Matter of the Estate )

                         )

of                       )             Notice of Probate

                         )

...., Deceased.          )

TO ALL PERSONS INTERESTED IN SAID ESTATE:

     You are hereby notified that on the .... day of ....,
(year), the estate of the above named decedent was admitted to
probate by the above named court, and that .... was appointed
personal representative thereof.

or-
     You are hereby notified that on the .... day of ....,
(year), the Last Will and Testament of decedent was admitted to
probate by the above named court, and .... was appointed
personal representative thereof. Any action to set aside the
Will shall be filed in the Court within three months from the
date of the first publication of this notice, or thereafter be
forever barred.

     Notice is further given that all persons indebted to the
decedent or to his Estate are requested to make immediate
payment to the undersigned at ...., Wyoming.

     Creditors having claims against the decedent or the estate
are required to file them in duplicate with the necessary
vouchers, in the office of the Clerk of said Court, on or before
three months after the date of the first publication of this
notice, and if such claims are not so filed, unless otherwise
allowed or paid, they will be forever barred.

     Dated ...., (year).        Personal Representative ....

PUBLISH: (once a week for 3 successive weeks).

     2-7-202.   Public auction of real or personal property;
contents.

     (a) When a sale of real or personal property of a decedent
is ordered and is to be made at public auction, notice of the
time and place of sale shall be published in a daily or weekly
newspaper of general circulation in the county in which the
probate is pending and in the county in which such property is
situate once a week for three (3) consecutive weeks next before
the sale, except in the case of perishable and other personal
property likely to depreciate in value or which will incur loss
by being kept, and as much other personal property as may be
necessary to pay the allowance made to the family of the
decedent.

     (b) Notice shall set forth the time and place of sale and
a description of the property offered for sale, and may provide
that any and all bids may be rejected by the personal
representative.

     (c) A copy of the notice shall also be mailed as provided
in W.S. 2-7-205.
     2-7-203. Order to show cause for setting off exempt
property; form.

     (a) The order to show cause shall be published once in a
newspaper of general circulation in the county in which the
probate is pending, and a copy of the order shall be mailed by
the personal representative to each heir and beneficiary. The
publication and mailing shall be not less than ten (10) days
prior to the date set for hearing.

     (b) The publication and notice may be combined with the
notice opening the probate but the hearing on the order shall
not be held prior to ten (10) days after the filing of the
appraisement.

     (c)   The notice shall be substantially in the following
form:

State of Wyoming          )         In the District Court

                          )ss

County of ....            )        .... Judicial District

                          )               Probate No. ...

In the Matter of the Estate)

                          )

of                        )           Order to Show Cause

...., Deceased.           )

     Petition having been filed in this Court praying to have
the exempt property of the Estate, including homestead, set over
to the person or persons entitled thereto.

     Now, therefore, it is hereby ordered that all persons
interested appear before this Court sitting in ...., Wyoming, on
the .... day of ...., (year), at the hour of .... o'clock in the
.... room, to show cause why the exempt property should not be
set over to the person or persons entitled thereto.

     It is further ordered that a copy of this Order be
published on the .... day of .... (year), in a newspaper of
general circulation and that copies of this Order be mailed to
the heirs and beneficiaries of the decedent not less than ten
(10) days prior to the date set for said hearing.

Dated this .... day of ...., (year).      BY THE COURT:

PUBLISH:                                           Judge ....

     2-7-204.    Final account and petition for distribution;
form.

     (a) When an estate is in condition for final settlement,
but not less than three (3) months after the date of the first
publication of the notice of opening the probate, the personal
representative shall give notice that he has filed in the office
of the clerk of court a final account and petition for
distribution, where anyone interested may examine and file
objections thereto in writing at any time within ten (10) days
after the day mentioned in the notice, naming the last day on
which any objections may be filed. The notice shall state if no
objections are filed within the time allowed, he shall make
final settlement of the estate on the day following the last day
for filing objections or as soon thereafter as the matter may be
heard.

     (b)   The notice shall be substantially in the following
form:

                 NOTICE OF FINAL SETTLEMENT OF ESTATE

State of Wyoming      )

                      )ss                 Probate No. ....

County of ....        )

     To all persons interested in the Estate of ...., deceased,
take notice that the undersigned Personal Representative did, on
the .... day of ...., (year), file in the office of the Clerk of
the District Court, .... Judicial District, in said County and
State, his Final Account and Petition for Distribution of the
Estate, a copy of which is hereby delivered to you, and upon
examination of the Account and Petition you may file objections
thereto in writing with the Clerk at any time on or before the
.... day of ...., (year).

     If no objections are filed thereto, the Personal
Representative will make final settlement of the Estate on the
.... day of ...., (year), or as soon thereafter as the matter
may be heard.

     Dated the .... day of ...., (year).

                               Personal Representative ....

     2-7-205.   Parties entitled to receive.

     (a) Subject to subsection (d) of this section, a true copy
of the notice required in W.S. 2-7-201 shall be mailed by
ordinary United States mail, first class, to:

          (i) The surviving spouse, if any, and to all of the
heirs at law of the decedent and to all of the beneficiaries
named in the will of the decedent. The mailings shall be made
not later than one (1) week after the first publication of the
notice in the newspaper;

          (ii) Each creditor of the decedent whose identity is
reasonably ascertainable by the personal representative within
the time limited in the notice to creditors. The mailing shall
be made not later than thirty (30) days prior to the expiration
of three (3) months after the first publication of the notice in
the newspaper;

          (iii) The state department of health if the decedent
received medical assistance pursuant to W.S. 42-4-101 through
42-4-114; and

          (iv) The department of family services if the
decedent or any heir at law of the decedent, if known, is the
obligor on a child support order being enforced by the
department.

     (b) Unless waived in writing by the parties entitled
thereto, the notices required in W.S. 2-7-202, 2-7-203, 2-7-204,
2-7-615, 2-7-806, 2-7-807 and 2-7-811 shall be mailed not less
than ten (10) days prior to the day of hearing, the date for
filing objections, or sale, as the case may be, to the surviving
spouse, if any, and to all of the heirs of a decedent dying
intestate or to all of the beneficiaries named in the will of a
decedent dying testate.

     (c) Notice of all intended sales of real property not
requiring an order of the court shall be mailed or delivered not
less than ten (10) days prior to the sale to the surviving
spouse, if any, and to the heirs of a decedent dying intestate
or to all of the beneficiaries named in the will of a decedent
dying testate.

     (d) Notice to the agent or attorney of any party entitled
to notice under this section is notice to that party.

     2-7-206.   Proof by affidavit; filing thereof.

     (a) The proof of publication of the notices required in
W.S. 2-7-201, 2-7-202 and 2-7-203 shall be by affidavit of the
publisher.

     (b) The proof of mailing or delivery of all notices
required in W.S. 2-7-201, 2-7-202, 2-7-203, 2-7-204 and 2-7-205
shall be by affidavit of the personal representative or his
attorney.

     (c) The affidavits for proof of publication and mailing
notices shall be filed with the clerk of court from which the
letters were issued.

                ARTICLE 3 - TEMPORARY ADMINISTRATION

     2-7-301.   Appointment of special administrator; when to be
made.

When there is delay in granting letters from any cause, or when
the letters are granted irregularly, or no sufficient bond is
filed as required, or when no application is made for letters,
or when a personal representative dies or is suspended or
removed, the district court shall appoint a special
administrator to collect and take charge of the estate of the
decedent in whatever county or counties the estate assets may be
found, and to exercise all powers necessary for the preservation
of the estate.

     2-7-302. Appointment of special administrator; entry of
order and issuance of letters.

The appointment may be made at any time without notice.
Appointment shall be made by entry upon the minutes of the court
specifying the powers to be exercised by the special
administrator. Upon entry of the order and filing of the
required bond, the clerk shall issue letters to the person in
conformity with the order.
     2-7-303. Appointment of special administrator;
preferences; appeal precluded.

In making the appointment of a special administrator, the court
or officer shall give preference to the person entitled to
letters but no appeal to the supreme court shall be allowed from
the appointment.

     2-7-304.   Special administrator; surety and oath.

Before any letters are issued to any special administrator, he
shall provide such surety as the court or officer directs. He
shall take the usual oath and have the oath endorsed on his
letters.

     2-7-305. Special administrator; powers and duties; no
liability to creditors.

The special administrator shall collect and preserve for the
personal representative all goods, chattels, debts and effects
of the decedent, and all incomes, rents, issues and profits,
claims and demands of the estate. He shall take the charge and
management of, enter upon, and preserve from damage, waste and
injury, the real estate. For any and all necessary purposes he
may commence and maintain or defend suits and other legal
proceedings as an administrator. He may sell the perishable
property as the court or officer may order to be sold, and
exercise such other powers as are conferred upon him by his
appointment, but in no case is he liable to any creditor on a
claim against the decedent.

     2-7-306.   Special administrator; cessation of powers.

When letters on the estate of the decedent have been granted,
the powers of the special administrator cease, and he shall
forthwith deliver to the personal representative all the
property and effects of the decedent in his hands, and the
personal representative may prosecute to final judgment any suit
commenced by the special administrator.

     2-7-307.   Special administrator; rendition of account.

The special administrator shall render an account, on oath, of
his proceedings, in like manner as other personal
representatives are required to do.

                  ARTICLE 4 - MARSHALLING ASSETS
     2-7-401. Personal representative entitled to possession of
all property; duty to repair; actions by heirs for possession or
to quiet title.

The personal representative is entitled to possession of all
real and personal estate of the decedent, and to receive the
rents and profits of the real estate until the estate is settled
or until delivery by order of the court to the heirs or
beneficiaries. He shall keep in good repair all houses,
buildings and fixtures under his control. The heirs or
beneficiaries may themselves or jointly with the personal
representative maintain an action for possession of the real
estate or for quieting title to the same, against anyone except
the personal representative, but this section shall not be so
construed as requiring them to do so.

     2-7-402. Title to decedent's property; subject to
administration and payment of debts; priorities.

Except as otherwise provided in this code, when a person dies
the title to his property, real and personal, passes to the
person to whom it is devised by his last will, or in the absence
of such disposition to the persons who succeed to his estate as
provided in this code. However all of his property is subject to
the possession of the personal representative and to the control
of the court for the purposes of administration, sale or other
disposition under the provisions of law, and his property,
except homestead and other exempt property, is chargeable with
the payment of debts and charges against his estate. There is no
priority between real and personal property, except as provided
in this code or by the will of the decedent.

     2-7-403. Return of inventory of estate by representative;
failure to comply; disposition of fines.

     (a) Every personal representative shall make and return to
the court within one hundred twenty (120) days after his
appointment a true inventory upon his oath, of all the estate of
the decedent, including the homestead, if any, which has come to
his possession or knowledge. If the personal representative does
not file such inventory within one hundred twenty (120) days, he
shall show the court good cause for his delay and the court
shall determine whether or not an extension of time shall be
allowed. For failure to comply in good faith with the time
limitations set forth, the personal representative shall be
adjudged in contempt of court, and a fine imposed and other
enforcement entered as the court in its discretion determines.
Any fine assessed shall be paid into the corpus of the estate.

     (b) Anything herein to the contrary notwithstanding, in
all cases to which W.S. 2-5-101 applies, the inventory shall be
filed not more than seventy-five (75) days after the will has
been admitted to probate.

     2-7-404. Report of appraisal; verification of values of
estate assets.

     (a) Within one hundred twenty (120) days after the timely
filing by the personal representative of the inventory of assets
of the estate of the decedent, pursuant to W.S. 2-7-403, the
personal representative shall file under oath a report of
appraisal of values of estate assets listed in the inventory.
The report shall be in compliance with such of the following
requirements as may be applicable:

          (i) As to all assets listed in the inventory which
have a readily determinable market value, the value of each
asset as of date of death shall be stated in writing by one (1)
disinterested person;

          (ii) As to all assets listed in the inventory that do
not have a readily determinable market value, the personal
representative shall employ disinterested persons to determine
the fair market value of each such asset, as of the date of
death. A separate written report as to the value of each asset,
showing the appraiser's basis for arriving at the value, shall
be attached to the report.

     (b) Different persons may be employed to appraise or
determine the value of different assets included in the estate.

     (c) The report, with any attachments required by this
section, shall be filed with the clerk of court.

     (d) The amount of the fee to be paid to any appraiser, or
any person making the required statement, shall be within the
discretion of the personal representative, subject only to the
provisions of W.S. 2-7-802(a) as to reasonableness and approval
at the hearing of the final report and accounting of the
personal representative.

     2-7-405.   Repealed by Laws 1985, ch. 15, § 2.
     2-7-406.   Repealed by Laws 1985, ch. 15, § 2.

     2-7-407. Effect of naming debtor as personal
representative.

The naming of a debtor as personal representative does not
discharge him from any just claim which the testator has against
him. The claim shall be included in the inventory and the
personal representative is liable for the same when the debt or
demand becomes due.

     2-7-408. Discharge or bequest of debt or demand not valid
against creditors.

The discharge or bequest in a will of any debt or demand of the
testator against the personal representative named or any other
person is not valid against the creditors of the decedent, but
is a specific bequest of the debt or demand. It shall be
included in the inventory and if necessary applied in the
payment of the debts. If not necessary for that purpose, it
shall be paid in the same manner and proportion as other
specific legacies.

     2-7-409.   Failure to file inventory or appraisement.

If a personal representative neglects or refuses to file either
the inventory or appraisement within the time prescribed or
within such further time which the court shall for reasonable
cause allow, the court or commissioner may, upon notice, in
addition to all other remedies and penalties provided in this
code, revoke the letters and the personal representative is
liable on his bond for any injury to the estate or rights of any
person interested therein arising from such failure.

     2-7-410. Appraisement of after-discovered property;
filing; enforcement.

Whenever property not mentioned in any inventory comes to the
possession or knowledge of the personal representative, he shall
cause the same to be appraised in the manner prescribed and an
appraisement thereof filed within one (1) month after the
discovery. The making of the appraisement may be enforced, after
notice, by any and all remedies provided by this code.

     2-7-411. Liability for embezzlement or alienation of
monies before letters granted.
If any person, before the granting of letters embezzles or
alienates any of the monies, goods, chattels or effects of a
decedent he is chargeable therewith and liable to an action by
the personal representative of the estate for double the value
of the property embezzled or alienated, for the benefit of the
estate.

     2-7-412. Citation to persons suspected of having concealed
monies; generally.

If any personal representative or other person interested in the
estate of a decedent complains to the court in writing, verified
by oath, that any person is suspected of having concealed,
embezzled, smuggled, conveyed away or disposed of any monies,
goods or chattels of the decedent or in which he had an
interest, or has in his possession or knowledge any deeds,
conveyances, bonds, contracts or other writings which contain
evidence of or tend to disclose the right, title, interest or
claim of the decedent to any real or personal estate or any
claim or demand, or any lost will, the court shall cite the
person to appear before the court and shall examine him on oath
upon the matter of the complaint. If the person is not in the
county where the decedent died or where letters have been
granted he may be cited and examined either before the court of
the county where he is found or before the court of the county
where the decedent died or where letters have been granted. But
if in the latter case he appears and is found innocent his
necessary expenses shall be allowed him out of the estate.

     2-7-413. Citation to persons suspected of having concealed
monies; failure to appear or answer; disclosure order;
proceedings generally.

     (a) If the person cited refuses to appear and submit to an
examination or to answer interrogatories put to him touching the
matters of complaint, the court may commit him to the county
jail until he submits to the order of the court or is discharged
according to law. If upon examination it appears that he has
concealed, embezzled, smuggled, conveyed away or disposed of any
monies, goods or chattels of the decedent or has in his
possession or knowledge any deeds, conveyances, bonds, contracts
or other writings containing evidence of or tending to disclose
the right, title, interest or claim of the decedent to any real
or personal estate, claim or demand, or any lost will of the
decedent, an order may be made requiring the person to disclose
his knowledge thereof to the personal representative and he may
be committed to the county jail until the order is complied with
or he is discharged according to law.

     (b) All interrogatories and answers shall be in writing,
signed by the party examined and filed in the court. The order
for disclosure made upon the examination is prima facie evidence
of the right of the personal representative to the property in
any action brought for the recovery thereof. Any judgment
recovered shall be for double the value of the property as
assessed by the court, or for return of the property and damages
in addition thereto equal to the value of the property. In
addition to the examination of the party, witnesses may be
produced and examined on either side.

     2-7-414.   Citation of persons entrusted with monies for
accounting.

Upon the complaint on oath of any personal representative, the
court shall cite any person who has been entrusted with any part
of the estate of the decedent to appear before the court and
require him to render a full account of any monies, goods,
chattels, bonds, accounts or other property or papers belonging
to the estate which have come to his possession in trust for the
personal representative, and of his proceedings thereon. If the
person cited refuses to appear and render the account he shall
be proceeded against as provided in W.S. 2-7-413.

          ARTICLE 5 - PROPERTY ALLOWANCE FOR SURVIVING
                    SPOUSE AND MINOR CHILDREN

     2-7-501.   Right to homestead and support; "homestead"
defined.

     (a) When a person dies leaving a spouse or minor children,
the spouse or minor children are entitled to remain in
possession of the homestead, all wearing apparel of the family,
and all household furniture of the decedent until letters are
granted and the inventory is returned. The widow or minor
children are also entitled to a reasonable provision for their
support, to be allowed by the court.

     (b) When any person dies seized of a homestead, leaving a
spouse or minor children, the spouse or minor children are
entitled to the homestead. If there is neither spouse nor minor
children the homestead is liable for the debts of the decedent.
     (c) "Homestead" includes that property referred to in W.S.
2-7-507 to the extent in value stated in W.S. 2-7-508.

     2-7-502.   Extra allowance for maintenance of family.

If the amount set apart is insufficient for the support of the
widow and children, or either, the court shall make such
reasonable allowance out of the estate as is necessary for the
maintenance of the family according to their circumstances
during the settlement of the estate.

     2-7-503.   Preference and payment of allowances; exceptions.

Allowances made shall be paid in preference to all other charges
except funeral expenses and cost of administration. Any such
allowance, whenever made, may in the discretion of the court
take effect from the death of the decedent. This section shall
not be construed so as to invalidate any mortgage or lien of
record against decedent's property.

     2-7-504. Absolute property of surviving spouse and minor
children; exceptions; renouncement of will of no effect.

When any resident of this state dies leaving a spouse or minor
children, the court shall set over to the spouse, and if none to
the minor children, as their absolute property, all property of
the decedent exempt from execution under the exemption laws of
this state including the homestead. Such property shall not be
subject to the payment of debts of the decedent, except expenses
of administration or funeral expenses of the decedent in cases
in which there is not other property in the estate sufficient to
pay the expenses. If [the] decedent does not have any or all of
the property specified under the exemption laws, the spouse or
minor children are entitled to the value of the exempt property
either in money or other property as they may prefer. If the
surviving spouse is not the parent of all or any minor children,
one-half (1/2) of the property shall be set over to the
surviving spouse and the other one-half (1/2) to the minors who
are not children of the survivor. A conservator shall be
appointed for the children as in any other cases of estate
property descending to a minor. The right of a surviving spouse
to any of the exempt property is not affected by his or her
renouncing or failing to renounce the benefit of the provisions
made for him or her in the will of the decedent.

     2-7-505.   Procedure for setting off exempt property.
Any time during the administration of an estate and after the
first publication of notice of opening the probate and the
filing of the appraisement, any person interested may file a
petition showing the necessary facts and praying to have the
exempt property of the estate including the homestead set over
to the person or persons entitled thereto. Upon filing of the
petition, the court shall require all persons interested to
appear on a day certain to show cause why the exempt property
should not be set over to the person or persons entitled
thereto. The order shall be published once in a newspaper of
general circulation in the county in which the probate is
pending and a copy of the order to show cause shall be mailed by
the personal representative to each heir and beneficiary. The
publication and mailing shall be not less than ten (10) days
prior to the date set for the hearing. At the time set for the
hearing or to which the hearing is continued, the court shall
hear the evidence and make such order as the facts and law
require. If the whole estate of the decedent is found to be
exempt and is set over to the person or persons entitled
thereto, no further proceeding is required in the administration
of the estate unless further estate is discovered. The
publication and notice may be combined with and included in the
notice of opening the probate, but the hearing shall not be held
less than ten (10) days after the filing of the appraisement.

     2-7-506. Homestead to be set apart by court; payment of
liens or encumbrances.

If the homestead held prior to the death of the decedent is
returned in the appraisement at a value not exceeding the value
of the homestead exemption provided in W.S. 2-7-508, the court
shall order it set off to the persons entitled thereto. If there
are liens or encumbrances on the homestead and if the funds of
the estate are adequate to pay all claims against the estate,
all claims against the estate and any liens or encumbrances on
the homestead, whether filed or presented or not, if known or
made known to the personal representative, shall be paid out of
the funds. If the funds of the estate are not sufficient for
that purpose, liens or encumbrances shall be paid
proportionately with other claims allowed, and the liens or
encumbrances on the homestead shall only be enforced against the
homestead for any deficiency remaining after the payment.

     2-7-507.   Duty of appraisers to appraise and divide
homestead.
If the homestead is returned in the appraisement at more than
the value of the homestead exemption set forth in W.S. 2-7-508,
the appraisers shall determine whether the premises can be
divided without material injury. If they can be divided, the
appraisers shall admeasure and set apart to the parties entitled
thereto the portion of the premises, including the dwelling
house, as will amount in value to the homestead exemption and
make report thereof giving the metes, bounds and full
description of the portion set apart as a homestead. If the
appraisers find that the premises exceed in value the homestead
exemption and the premises cannot be divided without material
injury, they shall report the finding, and thereafter the court
may make an order for the sale of the premises and the
distribution of the proceeds to the parties entitled thereto.

     2-7-508.   Amount of homestead exemption.

Wheresoever in the Probate Code the limit of the homestead
exemption is established or referred to, the exemption is thirty
thousand dollars ($30,000.00).

     2-7-509. Costs of proceedings; homestead exempt from
claims against estate.

The costs of all proceedings provided for in W.S. 2-7-501
through 2-7-508 shall be paid by the estate as expenses of
administration. Persons succeeding by purchase or otherwise to
the interests, rights and title of successors to homesteads or
to the right to have homesteads set apart to them, shall take
the homestead exempt from claims against the estate of the
decedent.

       ARTICLE 6 - SALE AND OTHER DISPOSITION OF PROPERTY

     2-7-601.   When conveyance required; generally.

When a person who is bound by contract in writing to convey any
real estate dies before making the conveyance, and in all cases
when the decedent, if living, might be compelled to make the
conveyance, the court may order his personal representative to
convey the real estate to the person entitled thereto.

     2-7-602. When conveyance required; time and place for
hearing; notice.

On presentation of a verified petition by any person claiming to
be entitled to the conveyance from a personal representative
setting forth the facts upon which the claim is predicated, the
court shall appoint a time and place for hearing the petition
and notice thereof shall be personally served on the personal
representative.

     2-7-603.   When conveyance required; hearing.

At the hearing all persons interested in the estate may appear
and contest the petition by filing their objections in writing.
The court may examine, on oath, the petitioner and all before
him for that purpose.

     2-7-604. When conveyance required; order for conveyance;
journal entry.

If after hearing and examination of the claim the court is
satisfied the petitioner is entitled to a conveyance of the real
estate described in the petition, an order directing the
personal representative to execute a conveyance thereof to the
petitioner shall be made and entered on the journal of the
court.

     2-7-605.   When conveyance required; execution.

The personal representative shall execute the conveyance
according to the directions of the order.

     2-7-606. When conveyance required; dismissal of petition;
specific performance.

If upon hearing the right of the petitioner to have specific
performance of the contract is found to be doubtful, the court
shall dismiss the petition without prejudice to the right of the
petitioner, who may at any time within two (2) months thereafter
proceed by action to enforce specific performance thereof.

     2-7-607.   When conveyance required; title to pass.

Every conveyance made in pursuance of an order or decree as
provided in W.S. 2-7-601 or 2-7-604 shall pass title to the
estate contracted for as fully as if the contracting party
himself was still living and executed the conveyance.

     2-7-608.   When conveyance required; right of successor to
enforce.
If the person entitled to the conveyance dies before the
commencement or completion of proceedings therefor, any person
entitled to succeed to his rights in the contract, or the
personal representative of the decedent, may, for the benefit of
the person so entitled, commence the proceedings or prosecute
any already commenced. The conveyance shall be so made as to
vest the estate in the person entitled to it or in the personal
representative for his benefit.

     2-7-609.   When power given in will.

When power to sell, mortgage, lease, pledge or exchange property
of the estate is given to any personal representative under the
terms of a will, the statutory requirements for such purposes do
not apply.

     2-7-610.   Equitable conversion; effect thereof.

A testamentary direction to sell real property, or the exercise
of a testamentary power of sale of real property constitutes an
equitable conversion of real estate into personal property, but
shall not affect distribution of the estate under the provisions
of the will.

     2-7-611. When real property deemed personalty; when
personalty deemed real property.

     (a) Real property acquired by the personal representative
by the completion of foreclosure proceedings or by the
forfeiture of real estate contracts after the death of the
decedent is deemed to be personal property for the purpose of
administration and distribution of the estate.

     (b) In all cases of sale of real property by a personal
representative under order of court, the surplus of the proceeds
of sale remaining after the payment of debts and charges is
deemed to be real property and shall be disposed of in the same
proportions as the real property would have been if it had not
been sold.

     2-7-612. Purposes for which realty or personalty may be
sold; exempt personal property and homestead.

     (a) Any real or personal property belonging to the
decedent except exempt personal property and the homestead may
be sold, mortgaged, pledged, leased or exchanged by the personal
representative for any of the following purposes:
           (i)    The payment of debts and charges against the
estate;

           (ii)    The distribution of the estate or any part
thereof;

           (iii)    Any other purpose in the best interests of the
estate.

     (b) Exempt personal property under such provisions as the
court may direct, if not set off to the surviving spouse or
issue may be sold, mortgaged, pledged, leased, or exchanged, if
the surviving spouse or issue consents thereto.

     (c) The homestead, under such provisions as the court may
direct, if not set off to the surviving spouse or issue, may be
sold, mortgaged, pledged, leased or exchanged.

     (d) The proceeds from the sale of any exempt personal
property or from the sale of the homestead shall be held by the
personal representative subject to the rights of the surviving
spouse or issue unless the surviving spouse or issue has
expressly waived his rights to the proceeds.

     2-7-613.     Sale of personalty without court order.

Personal property of a perishable nature and personal property
for which there is a regularly established market may be sold by
the personal representative without order of court.

     2-7-614.     Petition to sell; generally.

A petition to sell, mortgage, exchange, pledge or lease any real
or personal property shall set forth the reasons for the
petition and describe the property involved. It may apply for
different authority as to separate parts of the property, or it
may apply in the alternative for authority to sell, mortgage,
exchange, pledge or lease. Whenever it is for the best interests
of the estate, real and personal property of the estate may be
sold, mortgaged, exchanged, pledged or leased as a unit.

     2-7-615.     Petition to sell; notice and hearing; exception;
court order.

Upon filing of the petition, the court shall fix the time and
place of hearing of the petition, and the personal
representative shall give notice of the hearing as provided in
W.S. 2-7-205, but as to personal property and as to the lease of
real property not specifically devised for a period of not to
exceed one (1) year, the court may hear the petition without
notice. In those instances where notice is required, the notice
shall state briefly the nature of the petition. At the hearing
and upon satisfactory proof the court may order the sale,
mortgage, exchange, pledge or lease of the property described or
any part thereof at such price and upon such terms and
conditions as the court may authorize.

     2-7-616.   Sale subject to mortgage.

When a claim is secured by a mortgage on property, the court,
with the consent of the mortgagee, may order the sale of the
property subject to the mortgage, and the consent shall release
the estate should a deficiency later appear.

     2-7-617.   Extension of credit in sales.

In all sales of property, the court may authorize credit to be
given by the personal representative on such terms as the court
may prescribe. Credit for more than twelve (12) months shall be
extended only after hearing pursuant to notice to interested
parties.

     2-7-618.   Purchase by holder of lien.

At any sale of real or personal property upon which there is a
mortgage, pledge or other lien, the holder of the lien may
become the purchaser, and may apply the amount of his lien on
the purchase price. If no claim thereon has been filed or
allowed, the court, at the hearing on the report of sale and for
confirmation of the sale, may examine into the validity and
enforceability of the lien or charge and the amount due
thereunder and secured thereby, and may authorize the personal
representative to accept the receipt of the purchaser for the
amount due thereunder and secured thereby as payment pro tanto.
If the mortgage, pledge or other lien is a valid claim against
the estate and has been allowed, the receipt of the purchaser
for the amount due him from the proceeds of the sale is a
payment pro tanto. If the amount for which the property is
purchased, whether or not a claim for it has been filed or
allowed, is insufficient to defray the expenses and discharge
his mortgage, pledge or other lien, the purchaser shall pay an
amount sufficient to pay the balance of the expenses. Nothing
permitted under this section shall be deemed to be an allowance
of a claim based upon such mortgage, pledge or other lien.

     2-7-619. Bond to prevent sale; liability for breach;
effect of compliance.

     (a) Any person interested in the estate may prevent a
sale, mortgage, pledge, exchange or lease of the whole or any
part of the real estate or personal property for any purpose by
giving bond to the satisfaction of the court, conditioned that
he will pay such demands against the estate as the court shall
require not to exceed the value of the property thus kept from
sale, mortgage, pledge, exchange or lease as soon as called upon
by the court for that purpose.

     (b) If the conditions of the bond are broken the property
will be liable for the debts unless it has passed into the hands
of innocent purchasers, and the personal representative may take
possession thereof and sell it under the direction of the court,
or he may prosecute the bond, or pursue both remedies at the
same time if the court so directs.

     (c) If the conditions of the bond are complied with the
property shall pass by devise, bequest, distribution or descent
as though there had been no debts against the estate.

     2-7-620.   Collateral attacks precluded.

No proceedings for sale, mortgage, pledge, lease, exchange or
conveyance by a personal representative of property belonging to
the estate is subject to collateral attack on account of any
irregularity in the proceedings which do not deprive the court
of jurisdiction.

     2-7-621.   Order for sale, generally.

The order shall describe the property to be sold, mortgaged,
pledged, exchanged or leased and may designate the sequence in
which the several parcels shall be sold, mortgaged, pledged,
exchanged or leased. An order for sale may direct whether the
property shall be sold at private sale or public auction, and
the place or places of sale. The order of sale may prescribe the
terms, conditions and manner of sale. The court may provide for
appraisal for its guidance as to value of the property, and
determine whether or not additional bond shall be deposited by
the personal representative. If real property is to be
mortgaged, the order may fix the maximum amount of principal,
the earliest and latest dates of maturity and the purposes for
which the proceeds shall be used. An order for sale, mortgage,
pledge, exchange or lease shall remain in force until terminated
by the court.

     2-7-622.   Notice of auction required.

In all sales of property at public auction the personal
representative shall give notice as provided in W.S. 2-7-202.

     2-7-623.   Adjournment of sale.

The personal representative may adjourn any sale when in his
discretion it is deemed for the best interests of the estate,
but no adjournment shall be to a time more than three (3) months
from the date first fixed for the sale. Every adjournment shall
be announced publicly at the time and place at which adjournment
is made.

     2-7-624. Verified report required; confirmation of sale,
by court; hearing may be ordered.

     (a) After making any sale, mortgage, exchange or lease of
real property, the personal representative shall make a verified
report thereof to the court. The court shall examine the report
and if satisfied that the sale, mortgage, exchange or lease has
been at a price and upon terms advantageous to the estate and in
all respects made in conformity with law, and that it ought to
be confirmed, shall confirm the sale, mortgage, exchange or
lease and order the personal representative to deliver a deed,
mortgage, lease or other proper instruments to the person
entitled thereto.

     (b) If the real property has been sold at private sale
without an appraisal for purpose of sale, or if it has been
appraised and has been sold at private sale for less than the
appraised value, upon filing of the report the court may enter
an order fixing a time and place for [a] hearing and a notice of
the hearing shall be served upon all interested persons. Prior
to the time fixed for the hearing, any person receiving notice
may file written objections to the entry of an order approving
the sale. If the court is not satisfied that the sale, mortgage,
exchange or lease has been made in conformity with law and that
it is in the best interests of the estate, it may reject the
sale, mortgage, exchange or lease and enter an order it deems
advisable.
     2-7-625.     Joining report with petition.

The report of any private sale, mortgage, exchange or lease of
real property, as provided in W.S. 2-7-624 may be joined with
the petition provided in W.S. 2-7-614.

     2-7-626.     Recording.

When real property is conveyed, encumbered or leased, the
personal representative shall file a certified copy of the order
of court entered under W.S. 2-7-624 together with the instrument
of conveyance, encumbrance or lease in the office of the county
clerk of the county or counties in which the real estate is
located.

     2-7-627.     Optional procedure.

In those instances to which W.S. 2-3-501 through 2-3-504 are
applicable, the personal representative may proceed thereunder
or proceed under W.S. 2-7-612 to 2-7-626.

                   ARTICLE 7 - CLAIMS AGAINST ESTATE

     2-7-701.     Debts and charges; classification.

     (a) In any estate in which the assets are or appear to be
insufficient to pay in full all debts and charges of the estate,
the personal representative shall classify debts and charges as
follows:

           (i)    Court costs;

           (ii)    Other costs of administration;

           (iii)    Reasonable funeral and burial expenses;

           (iv)    Allowances payable under W.S. 2-7-503 and
2-7-504;

          (v) All debts and taxes having preference under the
laws of the United States;

          (vi) Reasonable and necessary medical and hospital
expenses of the last illness of the decedent, including
compensation of persons attending him at his last illness;
          (vii)     All taxes having preferences under the laws of
this state;

          (viii) All debts owing to employees for labor
performed during the ninety (90) days next preceding the death
of the decedent;

           (ix)    All claims allowed under W.S. 2-7-707;

           (x)    All other claims allowed.

     2-7-702.     Debts and charges; order of payment.

Payment of debts and charges of the estate shall be made in the
order provided in the preceding section without preference of
any claim over another of the same class. If the assets of the
estate are insufficient to pay in full all of the claims of a
class, then the claims shall be paid on a pro rata basis without
preference between claims then due and those of the same class
not due.

     2-7-703. Filing required; failure to do so constitutes
bar; exceptions.

     (a) Except as otherwise provided in this section, all
claims whether due, not due or contingent, shall be filed in
duplicate with the clerk within the time limited in the notice
to creditors and any claim not so filed is barred forever. Any
claimant to whom the personal representative has mailed a notice
pursuant to W.S. 2-7-205(a)(ii) shall file his claim within
three (3) months after the date of first publication of the
notice in the newspaper, or before the expiration of thirty (30)
days after the mailing, whichever date is later, and any claim
not so filed is barred forever. If only one (1) copy of a claim
is filed, the clerk shall make a duplicate and shall charge the
claimant a reasonable fee not to exceed two dollars ($2.00) per
page.

     (b) The clerk shall forthwith transmit to the personal
representative one (1) copy of each claim when and as filed.

     (c)   This section shall not bar:

          (i) Claimants entitled to equitable relief due to
peculiar circumstances, if so found by the court in adversary
proceedings; or
          (ii) A claimant to whom no notice was mailed pursuant
to W.S. 2-7-205(a)(ii), if the court in adversary proceedings
finds that the identity of the claimant was reasonably
ascertainable by the personal representative within the time
limited in the notice to creditors published pursuant to W.S.
2-7-201.

     (d) Any claim not in excess of two hundred dollars
($200.00) may be allowed by the personal representative without
the filing of the claim by the creditor, but the personal
representative is answerable for the propriety thereof upon
hearing on his final report and accounting.

     2-7-704. Affidavit and other required supporting
documentation.

     (a) Every claim which is due, when filed with the clerk
shall be supported by the affidavit of the claimant or someone
in his behalf, that the account is justly due, that no payments
have been made thereon which are not credited and there are no
offsets to the same to the knowledge of the affiant. If the
claim is not due when filed or is contingent the particulars of
the claim shall be stated. The personal representative may also
require satisfactory vouchers or proofs to be produced in
support of the claim.

     (b) If the claim is founded on a bond, bill, note or any
other instrument, a copy of the instrument shall accompany the
claim. The original instrument shall be exhibited to the
personal representative, if demanded, unless it is lost or
destroyed, in which case the claimant shall accompany his claim
by his affidavit containing a copy or particular description of
the instrument and stating its loss or destruction. If the claim
or any part thereof is secured by a mortgage or other lien which
has been recorded in the office of the county clerk of the
county in which the land affected by it lies, it is sufficient
to describe the mortgage or lien and refer to the date, volume
and page of its record.

     2-7-705.   Future, contingent and unliquidated claims.

     (a) If a claim which will become due at a future time or a
contingent or unliquidated claim becomes due or certain before
the distribution of the estate, and the claim has been allowed
or established by a proceeding, it is paid in the same manner as
presently due and absolute claims of the same class.
     (b) In other cases the personal representative, or on
petition of the personal representative or the claimant in a
special proceeding the court, may provide for payment as
follows:

          (i) If the claimant consents he may be paid the
present or agreed value of the claim taking any uncertainty into
account;

          (ii) Arrangement for future payment or possible
payment on the happening of the contingency or on liquidation
may be made by creating a trust, giving a mortgage, obtaining a
bond or security from a distributee, or otherwise.

     2-7-706. Claim based on cause of action surviving
decedent's death.

Where a cause of action against the decedent survives his death
under W.S. 1-4-101 and 1-4-102, before an action may be brought
thereon in any court, a claim based thereon shall be filed and
shall have been rejected by the personal representative. The
running of the applicable statute of limitations on the cause of
action shall be tolled from the time the claim is filed until
five (5) days after the date of mailing of notice of rejection
by the personal representative. Any judgment rendered by any
court with respect to which compliance with this section has not
been accomplished, if sought to be enforced, shall be deemed to
be a claim not timely filed under W.S. 2-7-703.

     2-7-707.   Repayment of public assistance.

If any recipient of assistance under statutes of Wyoming
governing programs of public welfare dies possessed of money or
property and a claim for repayment of such assistance is filed
against the estate of the deceased, the court in which the
estate is being probated shall order the claim to be paid out of
the assets of the estate after the claims in W.S. 2-7-701 (a)(i)
through (viii) are paid and satisfied. No claim for repayment of
assistance shall be enforced against any property of the estate
that may be necessary for the support, maintenance or education
of the decedent's surviving spouse, minor child or other
dependent.

     2-7-708.   Personal claims of personal representatives.

     (a) If the personal representative is a creditor of the
decedent he shall file his claim as other creditors, and the
court shall appoint a competent person as temporary
administrator to represent the estate in the matter of allowing
or disallowing the claim. The same procedure shall be followed
in the case of co-representatives where all the representatives
are creditors of the estate. If one of the co-representatives is
not a creditor of the estate, the disinterested representative
shall represent the estate in the matter of allowing or
disallowing the claim against the estate by a co-representative.

     (b) The temporary administrator, after investigation,
shall file a report with the court recommending the allowance or
disallowance of the claim. Unless the court allows the claim, it
shall be disposed of as a contested claim in accordance with
W.S. 2-7-717 through 2-7-719.

     2-7-709.   Actions pending against decedent at time of
death.

Any action, including any counterclaim in any pending action,
pending against the decedent at the time of his death that
survives shall be filed as a claim within the time provided in
W.S. 2-7-703 by filing with the clerk in duplicate a certified
copy of the order of the court in which the action is pending
substituting the personal representative for the decedent,
together with a certified copy of any pleading asserting
contentions against the decedent. Any judgment thereafter
rendered in the pending action shall be subject to the
provisions of W.S. 2-7-719. If no claim is filed as provided in
this section, any judgment rendered in the pending action, if
sought to be enforced, shall be deemed to be a claim not timely
filed under W.S. 2-7-703.

     2-7-710. Judgments rendered against decedent before death;
execution thereon limited.

When any judgment has been rendered against the decedent in his
lifetime, no execution shall issue thereon after his death
unless the judgment is for the recovery of real or personal
property or the enforcement of a lien thereon. A judgment
against the decedent for the recovery of money shall be filed
with the clerk like any other claim. If execution is levied upon
any property of the decedent before his death, the property may
be sold for the satisfaction thereof, and the officer making the
sale shall account to the personal representative for any
surplus in his hands.

     2-7-711.   Judgments rendered against decedent after death.
A judgment rendered against a decedent who dies after verdict or
decision on an issue of fact but before judgment is rendered
thereon shall be filed with the clerk like any other claim. The
time within which the judgment shall be filed shall not expire
until ten (10) days from and after the date final judgment is
entered if the date is later than the time for filing claims
provided in W.S. 2-7-703.

     2-7-712.   Allowance and rejection of claims.

     (a) When a claim, accompanied by the affidavit required in
W.S. 2-7-704, has been filed with the clerk, the personal
representative shall allow or reject it and his allowance or
rejection shall be in writing and filed with the clerk within
thirty (30) days after the expiration of the time for filing
claims.

     (b) If the claim is filed with the clerk before the
expiration of the time limited for the filing of claims, the
same is filed in time though acted upon by the personal
representative after the expiration of such time.

     (c) Every claim allowed by the personal representative
shall be ranked among the acknowledged debts of the estate to be
paid in due course of administration.

     (d) When a claim has been filed with the clerk and is
rejected in whole or in part, the personal representative shall
immediately upon rejection notify the claimant by certified
mail.

     2-7-713.   Claims allowed in part.

Whenever the personal representative allows a claim in part, he
shall state in his report to the clerk the amount he allows. If
the creditor refuses to accept the amount allowed in full
satisfaction of his claim, he shall recover no costs in any
action brought against the personal representative unless he is
granted judgment for a greater amount than that allowed.

     2-7-714.   Claims barred by statute of limitations
precluded.

No claim shall be allowed by the personal representative which
is barred by the statute of limitations.
     2-7-715. Adjudication of propriety in handling claims
prior to final report.

At any time the personal representative may file an application
with the court for an adjudication binding upon all distributees
as to the propriety of the personal representative's past or
proposed allowance or rejection of any or all claims. Upon such
filing the court shall order a hearing. Notice shall be served
by the personal representative on each distributee by certified
mail not less than twenty (20) days before the date set for
hearing. Upon the hearing, an adjudication shall be rendered
which is final and binding upon all distributees served with
notice and shall not be questioned upon hearing on the final
report and accounting.

     2-7-716. Stay of probate proceedings pending final
disposition of claims and litigation.

Pending final adjudication of all claims and litigation as to
which claims have been timely filed, the personal representative
shall proceed with the administration of the estate to the
extent possible without prejudicing the possible rights of
creditors, but the estate shall not be closed and no payment of
claims or distributions to distributees shall be made which
would impair the ability of the estate to honor the claims as
finally adjudicated, in accordance with their priority. The
personal representative may obtain extensions of time in which
to file tax returns and pay taxes, and incur interest charges
with respect to the payment of those taxes, until all claims,
the payment of which would affect the amount of the taxes due,
and litigation is adjudicated.

     2-7-717.   Action precluded until claim rejected; exception.

No holder of any claim against an estate shall maintain any
action thereon unless the claim is first rejected in whole or in
part by the personal representative and the rejection filed with
the clerk, except an action may be brought by any holder of a
mortgage or lien, including liens under W.S. 42-4-207, to
enforce the same against the property of the estate subject
thereto where all recourse against the other property of the
estate is expressly waived in the complaint or no claim for
deficiency is made in proceedings for foreclosure by
advertisement and sale under W.S. 34-4-101 through 34-4-113.

     2-7-718.   Action on rejected claim; limitations.
When a claim is rejected and notice given as required, the
holder shall bring suit in the proper court against the personal
representative within thirty (30) days after the date of mailing
the notice, otherwise the claim is forever barred.

     2-7-719.   Certified copy of judgments to be filed; effect
thereof.

     (a) A certified copy of any judgment rendered as
contemplated by W.S. 2-7-709, 2-7-710, 2-7-711 or 2-7-717 shall
be filed upon its rendition with the clerk.

     (b) Any judgment rendered upon any claim for money only
establishes the claim as if it had been allowed by the personal
representative. The judgment shall be that the personal
representative pay, to the extent of assets available to satisfy
claims of that class augmented by any liability insurance
proceeds available as to the claim, in due course of
administration the amount ascertained to be due. No execution
shall issue upon the judgment, nor shall it create any lien upon
the property of the estate or give to the judgment creditor any
priority of payment.

     (c) If judgment is for the recovery of real or personal
property or the enforcement of a lien thereon, no execution
shall issue until ten (10) days after a certified copy of the
judgment has been filed pursuant to W.S. 2-7-719(a).

     2-7-720.   Short title; citation.

     (a) This act may be cited as the "Disposition of Community
Property Rights at Death Act".

     (b) As used in W.S. 2-7-720 through 2-7-729 "this act"
means W.S. 2-7-720 through 2-7-729.

     2-7-721.   Application of act.

     (a) This act applies to the disposition at death of the
following property acquired by a married person:

          (i) All personal property, wherever situated which
was acquired as or became, and remained, community property
under the laws of another jurisdiction, and:
               (A) All or the proportionate part of any
property acquired with the rents, issues or income of, or the
proceeds from, or in exchange for, that community property; or

               (B) Any property otherwise traceable to that
community property.

          (ii) All or the proportionate part of any real
property situated in this state which was acquired with the
rents, issues or income of, the proceeds from, or in exchange
for, property acquired as or which became, and remained,
community property under the laws of another jurisdiction, or
property traceable to that community property.

     2-7-722.   Presumptions as to applicability of act.

     (a) In determining whether this act applies to specific
property the following rebuttable presumptions apply:

          (i) Property acquired during marriage by a spouse of
that marriage while domiciled in a jurisdiction under the laws
of which property could then be acquired as community property,
is presumed to have been acquired as or to have become and
remained property to which this act applies; and

          (ii) Real property situated in this state and
personal property wherever situated acquired by a married person
while domiciled in a jurisdiction under the laws of which
property could not then be acquired as community property, title
to which was taken in a form which created rights of
survivorship, is presumed not to be property to which this act
applies.

     2-7-723.   Distribution of property upon death of a married
person.

Upon death of a married person, one-half (1/2) of the property
to which this act applies is the property of the surviving
spouse and is not subject to testamentary disposition by the
decedent or distribution under the laws of succession of this
state. One-half (1/2) of that property is the property of the
decedent and is subject to testamentary disposition or
distribution under the laws of succession of this state. With
respect to property to which this act applies, the one-half
(1/2) of the property which is the property of the decedent is
not subject to the surviving spouse's right to elect against the
will.
     2-7-724. Claim to community property; perfection of title
in surviving spouse.

     (a) If the title to any property to which this act applies
was held by the decedent at the time of death, title of the
surviving spouse may be perfected by an order of the court or by
execution of an instrument by the personal representative with
the approval of the court. Neither the personal representative
nor the court in which the decedent's estate is being
administered has a duty to discover or attempt to discover
whether property held by the decedent is property to which this
act applies.

     (b) If the surviving spouse or the spouse's successor in
interest claims that there is any property to which this section
applies, then a claim in writing with respect thereto shall be
filed in duplicate with the clerk of court within the time
limited in the notice to creditors and any such claim not so
filed is barred forever.

     (c) When such a claim is so filed, the personal
representative shall proceed as provided in W.S. 2-7-712(a) and
(d), and if such claim is rejected, the provisions of W.S.
2-7-717 and 2-7-718 will apply.

     2-7-725. Claim to community property; perfection of title
to decedent's interest in community property.

     (a) If the title to any property to which this act applies
is held by the surviving spouse at the time of the decedent's
death, the personal representative or an heir or devisee of the
decedent may institute an action to perfect title to the
property. The personal representative has no fiduciary duty to
discover or attempt to discover whether any property held by the
surviving spouse is property to which this act applies unless a
written demand is made by an heir, devisee or creditor of the
decedent.

     (b) If an heir, devisee or creditor of the decedent claims
that there is any property to which this section applies, the
party shall file a written demand in duplicate with the clerk of
court within the time limited in the notice to creditors,
demanding that the personal representative investigate such
matter and report thereon to the court. Any demand not filed
within the time limited shall be forever barred, and all claims
and causes of action arising out of such demand shall likewise
be forever barred.

     2-7-726. Rights of a purchaser for value; duty to inquire;
rights to proceeds from sale or security interest.

     (a) If a surviving spouse has apparent title to property
to which this act applies, a purchaser for value or a lender
taking a security interest in the property takes his interest in
the property free of any rights of the personal representative
or an heir or devisee of the decedent.

     (b) If a personal representative or an heir or devisee of
the decedent has apparent title to property to which this act
applies, a purchaser for value or a lender taking a security
interest in the property takes his interest in the property free
of any rights of the surviving spouse.

     (c) A purchaser for value or a lender need not inquire
whether a vendor or borrower acted properly.

     (d) The proceeds of a sale or creation of a security
interest shall be treated in the same manner as the property
transferred to the purchaser for value or a lender.

     2-7-727.   Rights of creditors not affected.

This act does not affect rights of creditors with respect to
property to which this act applies.

     2-7-728.   Rights of spouses to alter interests in community
property.

This act does not prevent married persons from severing or
altering their interests in property to which this act applies.

     2-7-729.   Testamentary disposition limited.

This act does not authorize a person to dispose of property by
will if it is held under limitations imposed by law preventing
testamentary disposition by that person.

ARTICLE 8 - FINAL REPORT, ACCOUNTING, DISTRIBUTION AND DISCHARGE

     2-7-801. Declaration of policy; clerk to maintain
calendar; administration to be completed within one year;
exception.
     (a) It is the policy of the state of Wyoming that the
administration of estates of decedents be completed as rapidly
as possible consistent with due protection of the interests of
creditors, taxing authorities and distributees. To effectuate
this policy, this code shall be so construed.

     (b) The clerk shall maintain a calendar as to each estate
opened and shall bring to the attention of the court for
appropriate action by the court on its own motion, any failure
of any personal representative to meet any time deadlines
provided by this code.

     (c) The administration of each estate of a decedent shall
be completed within one (1) year from the date of appointment of
the personal representative unless good cause is demonstrated to
the court by a verified report filed by the personal
representative, and a court order approving continuance is
entered. Failure to comply with this provision may be dealt with
by the court by citation for contempt, order of removal and
replacement of the personal representative, or any other remedy
the court deems appropriate to bring about prompt closing of the
estate.

     2-7-802.    Expenses of administration; standard; how paid.

     (a) The personal representative is authorized to incur and
pay at any time, subject to approval upon hearing his final
report and accounting, all reasonable and necessary expenses in
the care, management and settlement of the estate. The personal
representative's authorization shall be exercised with the
judgment and care under the circumstances then prevailing which
men of prudence, discretion and intelligence exercise in the
management of their own affairs. Subject to the foregoing
standard, the expenses may include but are not limited to
services relating to:

          (i)    Bank accounts and safekeeping facilities;

          (ii)    Appraisals;

          (iii)    Surveys;

          (iv) Title and lien searches and certifications as to
real or personal property;
          (v) Sales of real property and personal property,
including broker's commissions, premiums for title insurance,
services in connection with abstracts of title and auctioneer's
fees;

          (vi) Maintenance, repair, care and protection of
estate assets, including such expenses as are normally incident
to crops and livestock;

          (vii)   Property insurance of all types and liability
insurance;

          (viii) Events incident to distribution of estate
assets, such as stock transfer fees and other normal expenses
incident to transfer of title;

          (ix) Preparation of all necessary tax returns and
reports, and audit proceedings in connection therewith, relating
to the decedent and the estate and the distribution of the
estate;

          (x)   Publications and mailings;

          (xi) Location and identification of heirs and
beneficiaries; and

          (xii) Expenses, fees and costs of ancillary
administration in a state other than Wyoming.

     (b) Except as otherwise directed by the decedent's will,
the expenses shall be paid first out of income of the estate
received by the personal representative, then from the residue
of the estate.

     2-7-803.   Fees of personal representative; schedule.

     (a) If the court determines that by reason of unusual
circumstances the fee computed hereafter is not equitable after
considering the time and effort reasonably expended and the
responsibility with which the personal representative was
charged, the court may allow such additional fee as the court
determines proper. The court shall allow the personal
representative fees for ordinary services rendered to the estate
unless the personal representative files a written waiver as to
a part or all thereof. The fees shall be computed on the basis
of the amount of the decedent's probate estate accounted for as
follows:
          (i) For the first one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) of
the basis, ten percent (10%);

          (ii) For all sums over one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) but not exceeding five thousand dollars ($5,000.00)
of the basis, five percent (5%);

          (iii) For all sums over five thousand dollars
($5,000.00) but not exceeding twenty thousand dollars
($20,000.00) of the basis, three percent (3%);

          (iv) For all sums over twenty thousand dollars
($20,000.00) of the basis, two percent (2%).

     (b) In addition, further fees as are just and reasonable
may be allowed by the court to the personal representative for
extraordinary expenses or services actually incurred or rendered
by the personal representative and necessary to the proper
administration and distribution of the estate. Extraordinary
services shall include but not be limited to services rendered
by the personal representative relative to any tax matters and
services rendered by the personal representative in connection
with any litigation to which the decedent or the estate is a
party.

     (c) The amount of the decedent's probate estate accounted
for shall:

          (i) Include items with which the personal
representative is chargeable at their inventory value;

          (ii) Deduct any loss or add any increase shown by any
reappraisement or actual sale occurring during administration;

          (iii) Add all accretions to the estate which have
come into the possession of the personal representative such as
interest, dividends and profits on sales, not including money
borrowed or refunds of amounts paid by the personal
representative;

          (iv) Deduct the value of property lost or destroyed
without fault of the personal representative; and

          (v) Include accretions in net income, and not the
gross income, of any business operated or conducted during
administration of the estate.
     2-7-804.   Fees of attorney for estate; schedule.

     (a) If the court determines that by reason of unusual
circumstances the fee computed hereafter is not equitable after
considering the time and effort reasonably expended and the
responsibility with which the personal representative was
charged, the court may allow such additional fee as the court
determines proper. The court shall allow the attorney for the
estate fees for ordinary services rendered to the estate unless
the attorney files a written waiver as to a part or all thereof.
The fees shall be computed on the basis of the amount of the
decedent's probate estate accounted for as follows:

          (i) For the first one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) of
the basis, ten percent (10%);

          (ii) For the amount over one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) and not exceeding five thousand dollars ($5,000.00)
of the basis, five percent (5%);

          (iii) For the amount over five thousand dollars
($5,000.00) and not exceeding twenty thousand dollars
($20,000.00) of the basis, three percent (3%);

          (iv) For all sums over twenty thousand dollars
($20,000.00) of the basis, two percent (2%).

     (b) In addition, further fees as are just and reasonable
may be allowed by the court to the attorney for the estate for
extraordinary expenses or services actually incurred or rendered
by the attorney and necessary to the proper administration and
distribution of the estate. Extraordinary services shall include
but not be limited to services rendered by the attorney relative
to any tax matters and services rendered by the attorney in
connection with any litigation to which the decedent or the
estate is a party.

     (c) The amount of the decedent's probate estate accounted
for shall be determined pursuant to W.S. 2-7-803(c).

     (d) Nothing herein shall prevent the personal
representative and the attorney from negotiating lower fees.

     2-7-805. Allowance and payment of personal
representative's fees and attorney fees; limitations.
     (a) No fees shall be paid to the personal representative
or the attorney for the estate except upon order of the court.
At any time during the administration of the estate the personal
representative or the attorney for the estate or both may submit
a written, verified application to the court for an order
allowing partial or total fees and expenses for ordinary
services, or partial or total fees and expenses for
extraordinary services, or both. Any application for expenses
shall be supported by a written itemization of the expenses. Any
application for fees for extraordinary services shall be
supported by a written itemization showing the kind, nature,
extent and time spent in connection with the services. If
satisfied that the fees and expenses applied for or as limited
by the court may be allowed and paid without detriment to any
party interested in the estate or to the administration and
conclusion of the estate, the court may enter an order allowing
fees and expenses and authorizing payment from the estate. Any
fees and expenses allowed by any order entered ex parte are
subject to timely objection upon hearing of the final report and
accounting.

     (b) Only one (1) total fee for ordinary services of a
domiciliary personal representative, computed as provided in
W.S. 2-7-802, shall be allowed for any estate. Where more than
one (1) person serves as a domiciliary personal representative
either as co-fiduciaries or as a successor domiciliary personal
representative, the court shall apportion the total fee among
the parties in accordance with their agreement with each other,
or absent any agreement as the court deems fair and just. The
same rule shall prevail as to attorneys' fees for ordinary
services in domiciliary administration, computed in accordance
with W.S. 2-7-803, where more than one (1) attorney renders
ordinary services to the domiciliary estate.

     (c) Where one (1) person, or a partner or employee of the
same professional corporation as that person, serves both as
personal representative and as attorney for the estate, no fee
shall be allowed as to the estate for ordinary services of a
personal representative.

     (d) No contingent fee shall be allowed against an estate
or paid by an estate for legal services rendered to or for or on
behalf of an estate, except in a proceeding for recovery for
wrongful death under W.S. 1-38-101 and 1-38-102, unless before
commencement of the services a written contract is entered into
by the personal representative and the attorney with respect
thereto and the contract is submitted to the court upon written,
verified application of the personal representative and is
approved by the court. No contract shall be approved if it
violates any statute or rule of court. No contract shall be
approved unless it appears to the court, upon due consideration
of the size of the estate and the nature and extent of the legal
services to be rendered, that adequate compensation of the
attorney cannot be assured by allowance of fees for
extraordinary services pursuant to W.S. 2-7-803.

     (e) The provisions of W.S. 2-7-801 through 2-7-804 apply
to personal representatives and attorneys serving in ancillary
administration in Wyoming, except as the probate court in which
the ancillary administration is pending may otherwise determine
for good cause shown.

     (f) Any contract between the personal representative or
the attorney for the estate and any party interested in the
estate in contravention of W.S. 2-7-802 through 2-7-804 is void.

     2-7-806.   Verified interim report and accounting.

     (a) The personal representative may at any time file a
verified interim report and accounting with the court showing
the condition of the estate, its debts and property, the amount
of money received and the disposition made of any assets of the
estate.

     (b) If the final report and accounting is not filed by the
personal representative within one (1) year from the date of his
appointment, then a verified interim report and accounting shall
be filed at the end of one (1) year and annually thereafter
until the final report and accounting is filed.

     (c) On application of any creditor or distributee or upon
its own motion, the court may order an interim report and
accounting at any time embracing all matters directed by the
court. The court may order reports and accountings from time to
time as it determines to be in the best interests of the estate.

     (d) All interim reports and accountings shall be subject
to the provisions of W.S. 2-7-807(c).

     (e) No interim report and accounting is binding upon any
creditor or distributee unless it has been set down for hearing
by the court and notice thereof given to the creditors and
distributees by certified mail not less than twenty (20) days
before the date of hearing.
     2-7-807. Distribution before final settlement; notice;
hearing; costs.

     (a) Any time after thirty (30) days from expiration of
time for filing claims the personal representative or any
distributee may file a petition with the court for partial or
complete distribution of any share of the estate.

     (b) Notice of the petition and the time set by the court
for hearing shall be given to the personal representative and to
all persons entitled to notice as provided in W.S. 2-7-205. At
the hearing any other distributee may resist the petition or
make a similar petition for himself.

     (c) If it appears to the court there is property ready for
distribution held by the personal representative over and above
the amount necessary to pay the costs of administration and all
just claims and taxes of the estate, the court shall direct the
personal representative to distribute to each distributee his
proportion of the property ready for distribution. The court may
require each distributee to give bond to secure payment of his
proportion of the debts and taxes of the estate.

     (d) All costs, expenses and fees incurred in this
proceeding shall be paid by the estate unless the court
determines the proceeding was instituted capriciously and
without merit, whereupon the court shall order all costs,
expenses and fees be paid into the estate by the party
instituting the same.

     2-7-808.   Order of abatement.

     (a) Except as provided in the will, shares of the
distributees shall abate for the payment of debts and charges,
federal and state taxes, legacies and the share of the surviving
spouse who elects to take against the will without any
preference or priority as between real and personal property, in
the following order:

          (i)   Property not disposed of by the will;

          (ii) Property devised to the residuary devisee,
except property devised to a surviving spouse who takes under
the will;
          (iii) Property disposed of by the will but not
specifically devised and not devised to the residuary devisee,
except property devised to a surviving spouse who takes under
the will;

          (iv) Property specifically devised, except property
devised to a surviving spouse who takes under the will;

          (v) Property devised to a surviving spouse who takes
under the will.

     (b) If the provisions of the will, the testamentary plan
or the express or implied purpose of the devise would be
defeated by the order of abatement stated in subsection (a), the
shares of distributees shall abate in the manner necessary to
give effect to the intention of the testator.

     2-7-809.   Contribution among legatees.

When property specifically given by will has been sold for the
payment of debts, taxes or expenses of administration, all of
the distributees shall contribute according to their respective
interests, subject to W.S. 2-7-808, to the distributee whose
devise or legacy has been sold. When distribution is made, the
court shall settle the amount of the several liabilities, decree
the amount each person shall contribute and reserve that amount
from their distributive shares for the purpose of paying the
contribution.

     2-7-810. Federal capital gains tax; minimum preference
tax; apportionment.

     (a) Unless otherwise provided by will, when as a
consequence of sale of property by the personal representative a
federal capital gains tax or federal minimum preference tax is
owed by the estate, the tax shall be apportioned as follows:

          (i) That portion of the tax attributable to the
percentage of net sale proceeds used to pay debts and costs of
administration shall be charged and allocated in accordance with
W.S. 2-7-808;

          (ii) That portion of the tax attributable to the
percentage of net sale proceeds used to pay federal estate tax
shall be charged and allocated and collected in accordance with
W.S. 2-10-101 through 2-10-110;
          (iii) The remaining portion of the tax shall be
allocated to the distributee who would have received the
property had it not been sold;

          (iv) The distributee of the property had it not been
sold shall be credited for distribution before the allocation of
other debts, costs and taxes, with the net proceeds after
capital gains and preference taxes plus the contributions
required from other parties.

     2-7-811. Final report and accounting and petition for
distribution; contents; notice and hearing thereon.

     (a) When the estate is ready to be closed, the personal
representative shall file with the clerk of court, under oath,
his final report and accounting and petition for distribution.

     (b) The final report and accounting and petition for
distribution shall set forth the following:

          (i) An accurate description of all the real estate of
which the decedent died seized, stating the nature and extent of
his interest therein, which has not been sold and conveyed by
the personal representative;

          (ii)    Whether the deceased died testate or intestate;

          (iii) The name and place of residence of the
surviving spouse, or that none survived the deceased;

          (iv) In intestate estates, the name and place of
residence of each of the heirs and their relationship to the
deceased;

          (v) In testate estates, the name and place of
residence of each of the devisees and their relationship to the
deceased;

          (vi) Whether any legacy or devise remains in charge
on the real estate, and the nature and amount thereof;

          (vii)   Whether any distributee is under any legal
disability;

          (viii) The name of the conservator or trustee for any
distributee and the court from which his letters were issued;
          (ix) An accounting of all the monies and personal
property coming into the hands of the personal representative
unless such accounting is waived by all interested parties;

          (x) A statement as to whether or not all statutory
requirements pertaining to taxes, including the requirements of
W.S. 2-7-812(a), have been complied with;

          (xi) The personal representative's proposed
distribution of the estate.

     (c) The final report and accounting and petition for
distribution shall be set down for hearing before the court. A
copy thereof together with a notice of hearing shall be served
as provided in W.S. 2-7-204 and 2-7-205.

     (d) At or prior to the time fixed in the notice of
hearing, any interested party who wishes to object shall file
his objections in writing, in duplicate, with the clerk.

     (e) Upon the hearing, any matter appearing in the final
report and accounting and petition for distribution and any
matter improperly omitted therefrom may be called in question by
written objection timely filed except only such matters as to
which there has previously been a final adjudication. The
personal representative shall have the burden of proof as to any
issue of fact or law raised at the hearing. Upon conclusion of
the hearing the court shall make and enter such order as the
facts and the law require.

     2-7-812.   Payment of all taxes prerequisite; filing of
documents.

     (a) Before a final decree of distribution is entered the
court shall be satisfied by presentation of receipts, cancelled
checks, certificates, closing letters and other proof that all
federal, state, county and municipal taxes legally levied upon
the property of the estate or due on account of the estate or
death of the decedent have been fully paid. The court shall not
discharge any personal representative nor release his bond nor
issue a decree of final distribution of the estate until:

          (i)   Repealed by Laws 2017, ch. 125, § 2.

          (ii) All inheritance and estate taxes and interest
have been paid; or
          (iii) The court finds that no inheritance tax or
estate tax is chargeable against the estate.

     (b) All documents presented to the court shall be filed
with the clerk to be preserved as a permanent part of the court
file relating to the estate.

     2-7-813.   Final decree of distribution.

Upon approval by the court of the final report and accounting
and petition for distribution with any changes, corrections,
amendments or supplements as may be required, the court shall
enter a final decree of distribution. In the decree the court
shall name the persons and the proportions or parts of the
estate to which each is entitled. The personal representative
shall proceed forthwith to make the distributions. The
distributees may demand, sue for and recover their respective
shares from the personal representative or any person having the
same in possession.

     2-7-814.   Discharge of personal representative.

When the estate has been fully administered the personal
representative may petition the court for his final discharge.
Upon showing proof of payment or receipt that he has paid all
sums of money due from him and delivered under order of the
court all property of the estate to the parties entitled, and
upon showing that he has performed all the acts lawfully
required of him, the court shall make a decree discharging him
and his bondsman, if any, from all further liability.

     2-7-815.   Closing of estates.

The court, upon its own motion, or upon the application of any
party, may enter an order closing any pending estate when it
appears from the court files or otherwise that no known assets
belonging to the estate remain for administration or
distribution. Such order shall not be deemed to exonerate the
personal representative or his surety unless the order
specifically so provides.

                   CHAPTER 8 - REOPENING ESTATES

     2-8-101. After-discovered property or correction of
property description.
The final settlement of an estate shall not prevent the
reopening thereof for the purpose of administering
after-discovered property or for the correction of the
description of the property administered, and final settlement
shall not prevent the subsequent issue of letters if it becomes
necessary for any cause that letters be issued again.

     2-8-102.   Contents of petition; notice of hearing.

Any heir at law, devisee or creditor whose claim was allowed but
not satisfied in the original administration or other person
interested may petition for the reopening of the estate upon the
grounds specified in W.S. 2-8-101. The petition shall set forth
the names of all heirs at law, devisees and creditors and their
address, if known. If the address is unknown to the petitioner
he shall so state in the petition. Upon filing of the petition,
the clerk shall appoint a day for hearing the petition and give
notice thereof by mailing by certified mail, return receipt
requested, a copy of the notice to the heirs at law, devisees
and creditors named in the petition. Where an address is unknown
notice shall be served as provided in the Wyoming Rules of Civil
Procedure.

     2-8-103.   Proceedings upon hearing; supplemental orders or
decrees.

Upon hearing the petition, if due cause is shown, the court may
reopen the estate and administer any after-discovered property
and make any necessary orders correcting descriptions as to the
estate administered therein. No proceedings shall be taken by
the court after the reopening of an estate except as necessary
to administer after-discovered property or to correct errors
made in the description of the estate previously administered.
Any orders or decrees of the court made necessary by the
reopening of the estate shall be designated as supplemental
orders or decrees.

       CHAPTER 9 - PROCEEDINGS TO ESTABLISH TITLE WITHOUT
                         ADMINISTRATION

       ARTICLE 1 - SURVIVING REMAINDERMAN OR JOINT TENANTS

     2-9-101. Petition to establish rights upon death of owner
of life estate or joint interest in realty; notice; decree;
recording and effect thereof.
If any person dies seized of a life estate which terminates by
reason of his death, or of an estate by the entireties, or of an
estate by joint tenancy or joint estate with another, any person
interested in the property or in the title thereto may file in
the district court of the county in which the property is
situated a verified petition setting forth such facts. After two
(2) weeks notice by publication in a newspaper of general
circulation in the county, or otherwise as the court may order,
the court shall hear the petition and the evidence offered in
support thereof. If upon hearing it appears to the court that
such life estate, estate by entireties, estate by joint tenancy
or joint estate was created and vested, and that the life estate
of the deceased person terminated by reason of death, or that
the estate by entireties remains vested solely in the surviving
spouse by reason of death, or that the estate by joint tenancy
or joint estate remains vested solely in the surviving joint
tenant or joint tenants, the court shall so decree. A certified
copy of the decree shall be recorded in the office of the county
clerk and thereafter the decree and the record thereof together
with the record of the instrument or instruments purporting to
create the life estate, estate by entireties, estate by joint
tenancy or joint estate, shall be presumptive evidence of the
creation of such estate, the termination thereof and the
survivorship of the estate by entireties, estates by joint
tenancy or joint estate.

     2-9-102. Affidavit of survivorship; recordation; copy of
death certificate to be attached.

If any person dies who is the owner of a life estate which
terminates by reason of his death, or if any person dies who is
the owner with his surviving spouse of an estate by entireties,
or if any person dies who is the owner with another of a joint
estate or an estate in joint tenancy, any person interested in
the affected property or the title thereto may make the death a
matter of record by recording in the office of the county clerk
of the county in which the property is situate an affidavit
describing the property, the instrument under which the estate
was vested with appropriate references to its recording data if
the instrument was recorded, and certifying under oath to the
death of the decedent as the party who was named in and whose
death terminated his previous estate in the property under the
vesting instrument. The affidavit shall have attached thereto a
copy of the official death certificate of the decedent,
certified to by the public authority in which the original death
certificate is a matter of record.
     2-9-103. Affidavit of survivorship; prima facie evidence;
procedure deemed independent.

Each affidavit signed, sworn to and recorded substantially in
compliance with the provisions of W.S. 2-9-102, constitutes
prima facie evidence that all facts recited therein are true.
The permissive and nonjudicial procedure provided by W.S.
2-9-102 and 2-9-103 shall be independent of and shall not affect
or be affected by the procedure provided under W.S. 2-9-101.

                             ARTICLE 2
                     DETERMINATION OF HEIRSHIP

     2-9-201.   Application by petition two years after death;
where filed.

When more than two (2) years have elapsed since the death of a
person residing in this state, or residing outside of this state
but owning real estate or any interest therein situated within
this state, or who has made entry on any government lands and
has not received patent therefor, and there has been no
previous, record judicial determination of the decedent's heirs
or the right of descent of the real property interest, any heir
of the deceased or other person having derived title to any real
property or any interest therein from the deceased or from any
of his heirs either by direct or mesne conveyances, may make
application by petition to the court or commissioner of the
county in which the deceased was a resident at the time of his
death, or if a nonresident of the state at the time of his death
then in the district court of the county where the real estate
or some part thereof belonging to the deceased in his lifetime
is situated, for determination of the time of death of the
decedent and a determination of the heirs of the deceased, the
degree of kinship and the right of descent of the real property
belonging to the deceased.

     2-9-202. Application by petition two years after death;
fixing time for hearing; notice thereof; contents.

Upon filing the petition the court shall fix a time for hearing
the petition not less than thirty (30) days after the filing
thereof. Notice of the time and place of hearing shall be given
to all persons interested in the proceeding including creditors,
heirs and devisees, setting forth the filing of the petition,
the date of the supposed death of the deceased, his place of
residence, a description of the real property or interest
therein of which he died seized or a description of the real
property on which he had made an entry but had not yet received
patent and the interest in the real estate of the petitioner.
The notice shall be published once a week in a newspaper of
general circulation in the county for four (4) consecutive weeks
prior to the hearing, and shall be mailed simultaneously with
the first publication to those persons designated in W.S.
2-7-205.

     2-9-203. Application by petition two years after death;
hearing; determination and decree.

     (a) Upon hearing, if it appears to the court that more
than two (2) years have elapsed since the death of the deceased,
that he died seized of an interest in lands in this state or
that he died intestate having entered government lands and not
having received a patent therefor, and there has been no
previous record judicial determination of the decedent's heirs
or the right of descent of the real property interest, the court
shall determine the date of the decedent's death, who were the
heirs of the deceased upon the date of death, their degree of
kinship, the right of descent of the real property or interest
therein of which the deceased died seized or on which he had
made an entry but had not yet received a patent therefor and the
distribution each heir is entitled to receive from the known and
unknown real property interests of the decedent based on the
determination of the right of descent, and shall make and enter
its decree accordingly.

     (b) The findings of the court relating to a decedent's
date of death, intestacy, heirs, degree of kinship and right of
descent shall apply to any other real property in this state
subsequently discovered in which the decedent had a property
interest at the time of his death as identified by an affidavit
recorded pursuant to W.S. 34-11-101, provided that:

          (i) A copy of the judicial determination of the
decedent's heirs or right of descent shall be included with an
affidavit filed under W.S. 34-11-101 for the subsequently
discovered property;

          (ii) No other recorded judicial determination has
been made relating to the right of descent for that property.

     2-9-204. Procedure when applicant for public land dies and
patent issued to heirs.
     (a) Whenever any person makes entry on any land in the
United States and dies before patent for the same is issued and
patent thereafter is issued to the heirs at law of the decedent,
any person interested in the lands as heir at law or devisee or
as grantee or assignee of such heirs at law or devisee, or the
personal representative of any of them if deceased, may file a
petition in the district court in and for the county wherein the
land or any part thereof is situate, setting forth the date of
death of the decedent, the date of issuance of the patent and
that the patent was issued to the heirs at law of the deceased
person, the land described therein, the names, ages and
residence if known of the heirs at law of the deceased persons
and a request that a decree be entered by the court establishing
who are the heirs at law of the deceased person. Upon filing of
the petition the clerk of court shall make an order fixing the
time and place of hearing of the petition not less than thirty
(30) days from the filing of the petition.

     (b) Notice of the time and place for hearing the petition
shall be given by publishing notice thereof at least once each
week for three (3) successive weeks in some newspaper of general
circulation in the county and the mailing of true copies to all
known heirs of the deceased person at least ten (10) days prior
to the date fixed for the hearing. Proof of publication and
mailing shall be made to the court upon the hearing. Any time
before the date fixed for the hearing any person interested in
the lands as heir at law or devisee of the decedent or as the
grantee of any such heir at law or devisee, may answer the
petition and deny any of the matters contained therein. At the
time fixed for the hearing or at such time thereafter as may be
fixed by the court, the court shall hear the proofs offered by
petitioner and any person answering the same, and shall make a
decree conformable to the proofs. The decree shall have the same
force and effect as decrees entered in accordance with the
provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure.

                  CHAPTER 10 - TAX APPORTIONMENT

     2-10-101.   Short title.

This act may be cited as the "Uniform Estate Tax Apportionment
Act".

     2-10-102.   Definitions.

     (a)   As used in W.S. 2-10-101 through 2-10-110:
          (i) "Estate" means the gross estate of a decedent as
determined for the purpose of federal estate tax;

          (ii) "Fiduciary" means executor, administrator of any
description, and trustee;

          (iii) "Person" means any individual, partnership,
association, joint stock company, corporation, government,
political subdivision of a government, governmental agency or
local governmental agency;

          (iv) "Person interested in the estate" means any
person entitled to receive or who has received from a decedent
or by reason of the death of a decedent any property or interest
therein included in the decedent's estate. It includes a
personal representative, guardian and trustee;

          (v) "State" means any state, territory or possession
of the United States, the District of Columbia and the
Commonwealth of Puerto Rico;

          (vi) "Tax" means the federal estate tax and interest
and penalties imposed in addition to the tax;

            (vii)    "This act" means W.S. 2-10-101 through
2-10-110.

     2-10-103.      Among all persons interested in estate;
exception.

Unless the will otherwise provides, the tax shall be apportioned
among all persons interested in the estate. The apportionment
shall be made in proportion that the value of the interest of
each person interested in the estate bears to the total value of
the interests of all persons interested in the estate. The
values used in determining the tax shall be used for that
purpose.

     2-10-104. Probate court to determine; discretion allowed;
presumption of correctness.

     (a) The probate court having jurisdiction over the
administration of the estate of a decedent shall determine the
apportionment of the tax. If there are no probate proceedings,
the probate court of the county wherein the decedent was
domiciled at death upon the application of the person required
to pay the tax shall determine the apportionment of the tax.
     (b) If the probate court finds that it is inequitable to
apportion interest and penalties in the manner provided in W.S.
2-10-103 because of special circumstances, it may direct
apportionment thereof in the manner it finds equitable.

     (c) If the probate court finds that the assessment of
penalties and interest assessed in relation to the tax is due to
delay caused by the negligence of the fiduciary, the court may
charge the fiduciary with the amount of the assessed penalties
and interest.

     (d) In any suit or judicial proceeding to recover from any
person interested in the estate the amount of the tax
apportioned to the person in accordance with this act, the
determination of the probate court in respect thereto shall be
prima facie correct.

     2-10-105. Withholding upon distribution of estate; right
to recover deficiency; security required if distribution made
prior to final apportionment.

     (a) The fiduciary or other person in possession of the
property of the decedent required to pay the tax may withhold
from any property distributable to any person interested in the
estate, upon his distribution to him, the amount of tax
attributable to his interest. If the property in possession of
the fiduciary or other person required to pay the tax and
distributable to any person interested in the estate is
insufficient to satisfy the proportionate amount of the tax
determined to be due from the person, the fiduciary or other
person required to pay the tax may recover the deficiency from
the person interested in the estate. If the property is not in
the possession of the fiduciary or other person required to pay
the tax, the fiduciary or the other person required to pay the
tax may recover from any person interested in the estate the
amount of the tax apportioned to the person in accordance with
this act.

     (b) If property held by the fiduciary is distributed prior
to final apportionment of the tax, the distributee shall provide
a bond or other security for the apportionment liability in the
form and amount prescribed by the fiduciary, with the approval
of the probate court having jurisdiction of the administration
of the estate.
     2-10-106.   Allowances for exemptions or deductions and
credits.

     (a) In making an apportionment, allowances shall be made
for any exemptions granted and for any deductions and credits
allowed by the law imposing the tax.

     (b) Any exemption or deduction allowed by reason of the
relationship of any person to the decedent or by reason of the
purposes of the gift shall inure to the benefit of the person
bearing such relationship or receiving the gift; except that
when an interest is subject to a prior present interest which is
now allowable as a deduction, the tax apportionable against the
present interest shall be paid from principal.

     (c) Any deduction for property previously taxed and any
credit for gift taxes or death taxes of a foreign country paid
by the decedent or his estate shall inure to the proportionate
benefit of all persons liable to apportionment.

     (d) Any credit for inheritance, succession or estate taxes
or taxes in the nature thereof in respect to property or
interests includable in the estate shall inure to the benefit of
the persons or interests chargeable with the payment thereof to
the extent that, or in proportion as the credit reduces the tax.

     (e) To the extent that property passing to or in trust for
a surviving spouse or any charitable, public or similar gift or
bequest does not constitute an allowable deduction for purposes
of the tax solely by reason of an inheritance tax or other death
tax imposed upon and deductible from the property, the property
shall not be included in the computation provided for in W.S.
2-10-103 and to that extent no apportionment shall be made
against the property. The sentence immediately preceding shall
not apply to any case where the result will be to deprive the
estate of a deduction otherwise allowable under applicable gift
and estate laws, relating to deduction for state death taxes on
transfers for public, charitable or religious uses.

     2-10-107.   Charging temporary interest and remainder.

No interest in income and no estate for years or for life or
other temporary interest in any property or fund shall be
subject to apportionment as between the temporary interest and
the remainder. The tax on the temporary interest and the tax, if
any, on the remainder shall be chargeable against the corpus of
the property or funds subject to the temporary interest and
remainder.

     2-10-108. Institution of actions or proceedings to recover
tax; generally; apportionment of amounts not collected.

Neither the fiduciary nor other person required to pay the tax
shall be under any duty to institute any suit or proceeding to
recover from any person interested in the estate the amount of
the tax apportioned to the person until the expiration of the
three (3) months next following final determination of the tax.
A fiduciary or other person required to pay the tax who
institutes the suit or proceeding within a reasonable time after
the three (3) months period shall not be subject to any
liability or surcharge because any portion of the tax
apportioned to any person interested in the estate was
collectible at a time following the death of the decedent but
thereafter became uncollectible. If the fiduciary or other
person required to pay the tax cannot collect from any person
interested in the estate the amount of the tax apportioned to
the person, the amount not recoverable shall be equitably
apportioned among the other persons interested in the estate who
are subject to apportionment.

     2-10-109. Institution of actions or proceedings to recover
tax; actions by nonresidents.

     (a) Subject to the conditions in subsection (b) of this
section a fiduciary acting in another state or a person required
to pay the tax resident in another state may institute an action
in the courts of this state and may recover a proportionate
amount of the federal estate tax, of an estate tax payable to
another state or of a death duty due by a decedent's estate to
another state from a person interested in the estate who is
either resident in this state or who owns property in this state
subject to attachment or execution. For the purposes of the
action the determination of apportionment by the court having
jurisdiction of the administration of the decedent's estate in
the other state shall be prima facie correct.

     (b) The provisions of subsection (a) of this section shall
apply only:

          (i) If such other state affords a remedy
substantially similar to that afforded in subsection (a) of this
section;
          (ii) With respect to federal estate tax, if
apportionment thereof is authorized by congress.

     2-10-110.   Interpretation and construction.

This act shall be so interpreted and construed as to effectuate
its general purpose to make uniform the laws of those states
which enact it.

                    CHAPTER 11 - FOREIGN WILLS

                             ARTICLE 1
                            IN GENERAL

     2-11-101.   Short title and construction.

W.S. 2-11-101 through 2-11-105 may be cited as the "Uniform
Foreign Probate Act", and shall be so interpreted and construed
as to effectuate its general purpose to make uniform the law of
the states which enact it.

     2-11-102.   Where allowed and recorded.

A will duly proved, allowed and admitted to probate outside of
this state may be allowed and recorded in the proper court of
any county in this state in which the testator shall have left
any estate.

     2-11-103.   When to be filed.

When a copy of the will and the probate thereof duly
authenticated is presented by the executor or by any other
person interested in the will with a petition for probate, the
same shall be filed.

     2-11-104.   Admission to probate; effect.

If upon presentation it appears to the satisfaction of the court
that the will has been duly proved, allowed and admitted to
probate outside of this state and that it was executed according
to the law of the place in which the same was made, or in which
the testator was at the time domiciled, or in conformity with
the laws of this state, it shall be admitted to probate, which
probate has the same force and effect as the original probate of
a domestic will.
     2-11-105. Procedure when foreign law does not require
probate; filing, recording and effect.

     (a) When a duly authenticated copy of a will from any
state or country where probate is not required by the laws of
the state or country, with a duly authenticated certificate of
the legal custodian of the original will that the same is a true
copy and that the will has become operative by the laws of the
state or country, and when a copy of a notarial will in
possession of a notarial officer in a foreign state or country
entitled to the custody thereof (the laws of which state or
country require that the will remain in the custody of the
notarial officer), duly authenticated by the notarial officer,
is presented by the executor or other persons interested to the
proper court in this state, the court shall take the proofs as
may be appropriate.

     (b) If it appears to the court that the instrument should
be allowed in this state as the last will and testament of the
deceased, the copy shall be filed and recorded and the will has
the same effect as if originally proved and allowed in the
court.

                             ARTICLE 2
                     ANCILLARY ADMINISTRATION

     2-11-201.   Probate of estates of nonresidents.

In case of a nonresident's estate having property in this state
not exceeding in value the sum of four hundred thousand dollars
($400,000.00), which estate has been duly probated and settled
in another state, the probate of the estate in this state may be
dispensed with upon filing with the district judge in the proper
county a petition under oath showing the facts in the case
together with certified copies of the petition, order of
appointment of executor or administrator, inventory and final
decree of distribution of estate therein, and a full showing
that debts of the estate have been paid and the district judge
giving notice by publication for the period of three (3) weeks
of the intention of the petitioner to have the probate
proceedings admitted in this state as a probate of the estate.
If on the day set for hearing the petition no objection is made,
the judge shall make an order admitting the certified copies of
the proceedings in the estate to record in his court and they
shall be considered and treated from that time as original
proceedings in his court and shall be conclusive evidence of the
facts therein shown. If at such hearing any creditor objects to
the proceedings and shows that the decedent is indebted to him,
his claim not having been presented in the original state, the
matter shall be postponed and the creditor or other person shall
be allowed to petition for letters of administration as in other
cases. This section shall not be construed to prevent the courts
of this state from appointing a temporary administrator in this
state to collect and preserve the property of the estate of the
deceased person which may be located in this state.

     2-11-202.   Nonresident property in Wyoming; disposition.

     (a) In case of a nonresident's estate having property in
this state not exceeding in value the sum of four hundred
thousand dollars ($400,000.00), which estate is being duly
probated and settled in another state, the Wyoming district
judge may enter an order for the sale of the property located in
this state provided:

          (i) The petitioner files with the district judge in
the proper county a petition under oath showing the facts in the
case together with certified copies of the petition, order of
appointment of executor or administrator, notice to creditors
showing that the time for filing claims has expired, and
inventory of the Wyoming estate;

          (ii) The petitioner files a certified copy of an
order authorizing sale or other disposition of Wyoming property
issued by the court having jurisdiction over the estate being
probated in another state;

          (iii) The district judge gives notice by publication
for three (3) weeks of the intention of the petitioner to have
the property located in this state subject to sale or other
disposition; and

          (iv) If on the day set for hearing the petition no
objection is made, the judge shall make an order admitting the
certified copies of the proceedings in the estate and the order
authorizing sale or other disposition of Wyoming property to
record in his court and they shall be considered and treated
from that time as original proceedings in his court and shall be
conclusive evidence of the facts therein shown.

     (b) If on the day set for hearing the petition any
creditor objects to the sale or other disposition of the Wyoming
property, his claim not having been presented in the original
state, the matter shall be postponed and the petition denied.
This section shall not be construed to prevent the courts of
this state from appointing a temporary administrator in this
state to collect and preserve the property of the estate of the
deceased person which may be located in this state.

                             ARTICLE 3
                 FOREIGN PERSONAL REPRESENTATIVES

     2-11-301. Naming of executors and trustees; generally;
appointment of agents for service; bond when executor sole
legatee; applicability of provisions.

The testator may name in his will as executor or trustee any
person or persons who are residents and citizens of the United
States, or any bank or trust company organized under the laws of
this state or of the United States and doing business in this
state. When it appears to the court having jurisdiction that any
individual named as an executor or trustee in any will is not a
resident of this state or that any bank or trust company named
as executor or trustee is not authorized to do business in this
state, the court shall require the executor or trustee to
designate a resident, bank or trust company of this state as
agent or attorney upon whom any order, notice or process issued
out of the courts of this state may be served. Service on the
agent or attorney has the same effect as if served upon the
nonresident executor or trustee in person. If any nonresident
executor or trustee fails to appoint an agent or attorney, the
court shall revoke his authority to act. When the person named
as executor is also the sole legatee, instead of the bond
required by other provisions herein of an executor, he may give
a bond to the state in a sum and with sureties the court
requires, conditioned only to pay within the time fixed by the
court all the debts of the testator which are filed or exhibited
within the time fixed by the notice to creditors. He shall
return an inventory and appraisement as in other cases. Upon
execution and approval of the bond, the filing of the inventory
and appraisement and the publication of notice to creditors, the
estate of the testator vests absolutely in the sole legatee and
the debts of the testator so filed or exhibited become charges
against the legatee. Upon breach of the condition of the bond,
suit may be instituted on the bond by any creditor in the name
of the state for the use of the creditor. The provisions hereof
apply to all wills hereafter admitted to probate.

     2-11-302.   Naming of executors and trustees; powers;
generally.
A domiciliary foreign personal representative who has complied
with W.S. 2-11-301 may exercise as to assets in this state all
powers of a local personal representative and may maintain
actions and proceedings in this state subject to any conditions
imposed upon nonresident parties generally.

     2-11-303.   Naming of executors and trustees; limitations.

The power of a domiciliary foreign personal representative under
W.S. 2-11-302 shall be exercised only if there is no
administration or application therefor pending in this state. A
petition for local administration of the estate terminates the
power of the foreign personal representative to act under W.S.
2-11-302 but the local court may allow the foreign personal
representative to exercise limited powers to preserve the
estate. No person who before receiving actual notice of a
pending local administration has changed his position in
reliance upon the powers of a foreign personal representative
shall be prejudiced by reason of the petition for or grant of
local administration. The local personal representative is
subject to all duties and obligations which have accrued by
virtue of the exercise of the powers by the foreign personal
representative and may be substituted for him in any action or
proceedings in this state.

    CHAPTER 12 - ADMINISTRATION OF ESTATES OF MISSING PERSONS

     2-12-101. Filing of petition; information to be shown;
appointing day for hearing.

Whenever any resident of this state who owns or is entitled to
the possession of any real or personal property situate therein
is missing, or his whereabouts is unknown for ninety (90) days,
and a verified petition is presented to the court of the county
of which the missing person is a resident representing that the
whereabouts of the missing person has been for such time and
still is unknown, that his estate requires attention,
supervision and care of ownership, and setting forth the names,
ages and residence of the relatives of the missing person who
would be heirs at law were the missing person deceased, the
court shall order the petition to be filed and appoint a day for
hearing the petition not less than ten (10) days from the date
of the order.

     2-12-102. Publication of notice of hearing; service on
persons named in petition.
The clerk shall publish not less than twice during the ten (10)
days prior to the day appointed a notice in some newspaper
published in the county, stating that the petition will be heard
at the courtroom of the court at the time appointed for the
hearing. The clerk shall cause personal service of the notice of
hearing to be served upon all persons named in the petition as
heirs of the missing person should he be deceased resident in
the county, and cause to be mailed by certified mail a copy of
the notice addressed to each of the supposed heirs at their
address shown in the petition. The court may direct further
notice of the filing of the petition be given in such manner and
to such persons as it may deem proper.

     2-12-103.   Hearing on petition; appointment of trustee.

At the time fixed for the hearing or at any subsequent time to
which the hearing may be continued, the court shall hear the
petition and the evidence offered in support of or in opposition
thereto. If satisfied that the allegations thereof are true and
that the person remains missing and the whereabouts of the
person are unknown, the court shall appoint some suitable person
as trustee to take charge and possession of the estate and to
manage, hold and control the same subject to the direction of
the court.

     2-12-104.   Preference in appointing trustee.

In appointing a trustee, the court shall give preference to the
wife or husband of the missing person or their nominee, and in
the absence of a husband or wife, some person willing to act and
entitled to participate in the distribution of the missing
person's estate were he or she deceased, or a creditor of the
missing person.

     2-12-105.   Bond of trustee.

Every person appointed trustee under the provisions of the
preceding section shall give bond to the state of Wyoming with
two (2) or more sufficient sureties, or surety bond, conditioned
for the faithful performance of his duties, to be approved by
the court or clerk thereof. In form the bond shall be joint and
several and the penalty shall be not less than the value of the
personal property and the probable value of the annual rents,
profits and issues of real property belonging to the missing
person, which value shall be ascertained by the court or clerk
thereof by examining on oath the petitioner in the petition and
any other person deemed by the court or clerk to have
information or knowledge of such value. The sureties shall
justify on written oath attached to the bond in an amount equal
in the aggregate to the penalty thereof.

     2-12-106. Trustee to take possession of property; powers
and duties generally; removal of trustee; sale of property.

     (a) The trustee shall take possession of the real and
personal estate in this state of the missing person and collect,
receive and receipt for and hold subject to the order of the
court the rents, income, issues, profits and proceeds thereof
and all indebtedness owing to the missing person and pay out of
the trust funds the expenses of the trust and any indebtedness
of the missing person authorized by the court. The court may
direct the trustee to pay to the family of the missing person
such money for family expenses and support from the income of
the trust estate as the court from time to time may determine.
When directed by the court, the trustee shall account to the
court for all of the trustee's acts as trustee, and the court
may at any time upon good cause shown remove any trustee and
appoint another.

     (b) When a sale of the real or personal property of the
estate of a missing person is necessary to pay the allowance of
the family or the debts outstanding against the missing person
or the expenses of administration of the trust, or when it
appears to the court it is for the best interest of all persons
interested in the estate, the trustee may sell any real or
personal property of the estate upon order of the court.

     (c) The trustee in obtaining an order of sale and in
conducting a sale of property of the estate of a missing person
shall follow all the steps and procedure set forth in article 6
of chapter 7, Wyoming Probate Code relating to the sale of
property of a decedent.

                  CHAPTER 13 - SIMULTANEOUS DEATH

     2-13-101.   Short title.

     (a) This act may be cited as the "Uniform Simultaneous
Death Act".

     (b) "This act", when used in chapter 13 of the Probate
Code, means W.S. 2-13-101 through 2-13-107.

     2-13-102.   Applicability of provisions.
This act does not apply in the case of wills, living trusts,
deeds or contracts of insurance wherein provision is made for
distribution of property different from the provisions of this
act.

     2-13-103.   Disposition of property based on presumption of
survivorship.

Where the title to property or the devolution thereto depends
upon priority of death and there is no sufficient evidence that
the persons have died otherwise than simultaneously, the
property of each person shall be disposed of as if he had
survived, except as provided otherwise in this act.

     2-13-104.   Beneficiaries.

Where two (2) or more beneficiaries are designated to take
successively by reason of survivorship under another person's
disposition of property and there is no sufficient evidence that
these beneficiaries have died otherwise than simultaneously the
property thus disposed of shall be divided into as many equal
portions as there are successively beneficiaries and those
portions shall be distributed respectively to those who would
have taken in the event that each designated beneficiary had
survived.

     2-13-105.   Joint tenants or tenants by the entirety.

Where there is no sufficient evidence that two (2) joint tenants
or tenants by the entirety have died otherwise than
simultaneously the property so held shall be distributed
one-half (1/2) as if one (1) had survived and one-half (1/2) as
if the other had survived. If there are more than two (2) joint
tenants and all of them have so died the property thus
distributed shall be in the proportion that one (1) bears to the
whole number of joint tenants.

     2-13-106.   Life or accident insurance proceeds.

Where the insured and the beneficiary in a policy of life or
accident insurance have died and there is no sufficient evidence
that they have died otherwise than simultaneously the proceeds
of the policy shall be distributed as if the insured had
survived the beneficiary.

     2-13-107.   Construction and interpretation.
This act shall be so construed and interpreted as to effectuate
its general purpose to make uniform the law in those states
which enact it.

           CHAPTER 14 - FELONIOUS AND WRONGFUL DEATHS

                            ARTICLE 1
                         FELONIOUS DEATH

     2-14-101. Taking of life precludes one from inheritance,
insurance or survivorship benefits; how benefits distributed;
notification of insurer necessary.

     (a) No person who feloniously takes or causes or procures
another to take the life of another shall:

          (i) Inherit from or take by devise or legacy from the
deceased person any portion of his estate;

          (ii) Inherit, receive or otherwise take any property
held with the deceased person in a joint tenancy with rights of
survivorship, tenancy by the entirety or any other form of co-
ownership with rights of survivorship;

          (iii) Inherit, receive or otherwise take any property
conveyed by the deceased person by beneficiary designation,
transfer on death designation, payable on death designation or
other conveyance that occurs because of the death of the
deceased person;

          (iv) Serve through nomination, appointment or
otherwise in any fiduciary or representative capacity for the
deceased person, including as a personal representative,
executor, trustee or agent. Any provision in a governing
instrument conferring any power of appointment on the killer
shall be deemed to have been terminated at the time immediately
preceding the killing of the deceased person.

     (b) No beneficiary of any policy of life or accident
insurance or certificates of membership issued by any benevolent
association or organization, payable upon the death of any
person, who in like manner takes or causes or procures another
to take the life of another, shall take the proceeds of such
policy or certificate.
     (c) Except as provided in subsection (d) of this section
in every instance mentioned in this section all benefits that
would accrue to the killer upon the death of the person whose
life is taken shall become subject to distribution among the
other beneficiaries or heirs of the deceased person according to
the will, trust or other valid dispositive instrument of the
deceased person as though the killer has predeceased the
deceased person, or if no such valid instrument exists,
according to the rules of descent and distribution. However, an
insurance company is discharged of all liability under a policy
issued by it upon payment of the proceeds in accordance with the
terms thereof unless before payment the company receives written
notice by or in behalf of some claimant other than the
beneficiary named in the policy that a claim to the proceeds of
the policy will be made by heirs of the deceased under the
provisions of this section.

     (d) For purposes of paragraph (a)(ii) of this section, the
interests of the deceased person and the killer in property held
by them at the time of the killing as joint tenants with the
right of survivorship, tenants by entirety or any other form of
co-ownership with rights of survivorship shall be deemed to have
been terminated at the time immediately preceding the killing of
the deceased person and the interests of the deceased person and
the killer shall be recognized as tenancies in common.

     (e) As used in this section, "killer" means the person who
feloniously takes or causes or procures another to take the life
of another person as provided in subsection (a) of this section.

                             ARTICLE 2
                          WRONGFUL DEATH

     2-14-201.   Renumbered by Laws 1982, ch. 54, § 7.

     2-14-202.   Renumbered by Laws 1982, ch. 54, § 7.

                 CHAPTER 15 - ABSENT BENEFICIARIES

     2-15-101.   Court may appoint agent to care for property.

When any estate is assigned or distributed by a judgment or
decree of the court to any person residing out of and having no
agent in this state, and it is necessary that some person be
authorized to take possession and charge of the estate for the
benefit of the absent person, the court may appoint an agent for
that purpose and authorize him to take charge of the estate as
well as to act for the absent person in the distribution.

     2-15-102.   Bond of agent; compensation.

The agent shall execute a bond to the state of Wyoming, to be
approved by the court, conditioned that he faithfully manage and
account for the estate. The court appointing the agent may allow
a reasonable sum out of the estate for his services and
expenses.

     2-15-103.   Locating person entitled; proceedings if unable.

The agent shall, with diligence, attempt to locate the person
entitled to the property and notify that person of the agent's
possession thereof. If the agent is unable to locate the person
within one (1) year after the agent's appointment, the agent
shall advise the court, with a showing of the agent's efforts to
locate the person. The court may direct further efforts to
locate the person entitled as the court deems appropriate.

     2-15-104.   Disposition of unclaimed property.

When real or personal property remains in the hands of the agent
unclaimed for one (1) year, the agent shall petition the court
for an order directing the sale of the property. If it appears
to the court that it is for the benefit of all interested
parties the property shall be sold under the order of the court
and the proceeds, after deducting the expenses of the sale
allowed by the court, be held by the agent in a fiduciary
capacity subject to the provisions of the Uniform Unclaimed
Property Act, W.S. 34-24-101 through 34-24-140.

     2-15-105. Agent to render annual account; information to
be shown; hearing; court may order sale of property.

     (a) The agent shall render an annual account to the court
appointing him showing:

          (i) The value and character of the property received
by him, the portion thereof is still on hand, the portion sold
and the proceeds of sales;

          (ii)   The income derived from the property;

          (iii) The kind and amount of taxes and assessments
imposed and whether paid or unpaid;
          (iv) Expenses incurred in the care, protection and
management of the property and whether paid or unpaid.

     (b) When filed, the court may examine witnesses and take
proofs in regard to the account. If satisfied that it will be
for the benefit of the persons interested therein, the court may
order a sale to be made of the whole or such parts of the real
or personal property as appears proper and the purchase money to
be held by the agent in a fiduciary capacity subject to the
provisions of the Uniform Unclaimed Property Act, W.S. 34-24-101
through 34-24-140.

     2-15-106.   Liability of agent.

The agent is liable on his bond for the care and preservation of
the estate while in his hands and for disposition of the
proceeds of the sale as required by this chapter, and may be
sued thereon by any person interested, or such suit may be
ordered by the court.

     2-15-107.   Repealed by Laws 1993, ch. 213, § 3.

           CHAPTER 16 - UNIFORM TOD SECURITY REGISTRATION

     2-16-101.   Short title; rules of construction.

This act shall be known as and may be cited as the "Uniform TOD
Security Registration Act."

     2-16-102.   Definitions.

     (a)   As used in this act:

          (i) "Beneficiary form" means a registration of a
security which indicates the present owner of the security and
the intention of the owner regarding the person who will become
the owner of the security upon the death of the owner;

          (ii) "Devisee" means any person designated in a will
to receive a disposition of real or personal property;

          (iii) "Heirs" mean those persons, including the
surviving spouse, who are entitled under the statutes of
intestate succession to the property of a decedent;
          (iv) "Person" means an individual, a corporation, an
organization or other legal entity;

          (v) "Personal representative" includes executor,
administrator, successor personal representative, special
administrator and persons who perform substantially the same
function under the law governing their status;

          (vi) "Property" includes both real and personal
property or any interest therein and means anything that may be
the subject of ownership;

          (vii) "Register" including its derivatives, means to
issue a certificate showing the ownership of a certificated
security or, in the case of an uncertificated security, to
initiate or transfer an account showing ownership of securities;

          (viii) "Registering entity" means a person who
originates or transfers a security title by registration and
includes a broker maintaining security accounts for customers
and a transfer agent or other person acting for or as an issuer
of securities;

          (ix) "Security" means a share, participation or other
interest in property, in a business, or in an obligation of an
enterprise or other issuer, and includes a certificated
security, an uncertificated security and a security account;

          (x)   "Security account" means:

               (A) A reinvestment account associated with a
security, a securities account with a broker, a cash balance in
a brokerage account, cash, cash equivalents, interest, earnings
or dividends earned or declared on a security in an account, a
reinvestment account, or a brokerage account, whether or not
credited to the account before the owner's death;

               (B) A cash balance or other property held for or
due to the owner of a security as a replacement for or product
of an account security, whether or not credited to the account
before the owner's death; or

               (C) An investment management or custody account
with a trust company or a bank with trust powers, including the
securities in the account, a cash balance in the account, and
cash, cash equivalents, interest, earnings or dividends earned
or declared on a security in the account, whether or not
credited to the account before the owner's death.

          (xi) "State" includes any state of the United States,
the District of Columbia, the commonwealth of Puerto Rico, and
any territory or possession subject to the legislative authority
of the United States;

            (xii)    "This act" means W.S. 2-16-101 through
2-16-112.

     2-16-103. Registration in beneficiary form; sole or joint
tenancy ownership.

Only individuals whose registration of a security shows sole
ownership by one (1) individual or multiple ownership by two (2)
or more individuals with right of survivorship, rather than as
tenants in common, may obtain registration in beneficiary form.
Multiple owners of a security registered in beneficiary form
hold as joint tenants with right of survivorship, as tenants by
the entireties or as owners of community property held in
survivorship form, and not as tenants in common.

       2-16-104.    Registration in beneficiary form; applicable
law.

A security may be registered in beneficiary form if the form is
authorized by this or a similar statute of the state of
organization of the issuer or registering entity, the location
of the registering entity's principal office, the office of its
transfer agent or its office making the registration, or by this
or a similar statute of the law of the state listed as the
owner's address at the time of registration. A registration
governed by the law of a jurisdiction in which this or similar
legislation is not in force or was not in force when a
registration in beneficiary form was made is nevertheless
presumed to be valid and authorized as a matter of contract law.

       2-16-105.    Origination of registration in beneficiary form.

A security, whether evidenced by certificate or account, is
registered in beneficiary form when the registration includes a
designation of a beneficiary to take the ownership at the death
of the owner or the deaths of all multiple owners.

       2-16-106.    Form of registration in beneficiary form.
Registration in beneficiary form may be shown by the words
"transfer on death" or the abbreviation "TOD," or by the words
"pay on death" or the abbreviation "POD," after the name of the
registered owner and before the name of a beneficiary.

     2-16-107.   Effect of registration in beneficiary form.

The designation of a TOD beneficiary on a registration in
beneficiary form has no effect on ownership until the owner's
death. A registration of a security in beneficiary form may be
canceled or changed at any time by the sole owner or all then
surviving owners without the consent of the beneficiary.

     2-16-108.   Ownership on death of owner.

On death of a sole owner or the last to die of all multiple
owners, ownership of securities registered in beneficiary form
passes to the beneficiary or beneficiaries who survive all
owners. On proof of death of all owners and compliance with any
applicable requirements of the registering entity, a security
registered in beneficiary form may be reregistered in the name
of the beneficiary or beneficiaries who survived the death of
all owners. Until division of the security after the death of
all owners, multiple beneficiaries surviving the death of all
owners hold their interest as tenants in common. If no
beneficiary survives the death of all owners, the security
belongs to the estate of the deceased sole owner or the estate
of the last to die of all multiple owners.

     2-16-109.   Protection of registering entity.

     (a) A registering entity is not required to offer or to
accept a request for security registration in beneficiary form.
If a registration in beneficiary form is offered by a
registering entity, the owner requesting registration in
beneficiary form assents to the protections given to the
registering entity by this act.

     (b) By accepting a request for registration of a security
in beneficiary form, the registering entity agrees that the
registration will be implemented on death of the deceased owner
as provided in this act.

     (c) A registering entity is discharged from all claims to
a security by the estate, creditors, heirs or devisees of a
deceased owner if it registers a transfer of the security in
accordance with W.S. 2-16-108 and does so in good faith reliance
(1) on the registration, (2) on this act, and (3) on information
provided to it by affidavit of the personal representative of
the deceased owner, or by the surviving beneficiary or by the
surviving beneficiary's representatives, or other information
available to the registering entity. The protections of this
act do not extend to a reregistration or payment made after a
registering entity has received written notice from any claimant
to any interest in the security objecting to implementation of a
registration in beneficiary form. No other notice or other
information available to the registering entity affects its
right to protection under this act.

     (d) The protection provided by this act to the registering
entity of a security does not affect the rights of beneficiaries
in disputes between themselves and other claimants to ownership
of the security transferred or its value or proceeds.

     2-16-110.   Nontestamentary transfer on death.

     (a) A transfer on death resulting from a registration in
beneficiary form is effective by reason of the contract
regarding the registration between the owner and the registering
entity and this act and is not testamentary.

     (b) This act does not limit the rights of creditors of
security owners against beneficiaries and other transferees
under other laws of this state.

     2-16-111.   Terms, conditions and forms for registration.

A registering entity offering to accept registrations in
beneficiary form may establish the terms and conditions under
which it will receive requests (1) for registrations in
beneficiary form, and (2) for implementation of registrations in
beneficiary form, including requests for cancellation of
previously registered TOD beneficiary designations and requests
for reregistration to effect a change of beneficiary. The terms
and conditions so established may provide for proving death,
avoiding or resolving any problems concerning fractional shares,
designating primary and contingent beneficiaries, and
substituting a named beneficiary's descendants to take in the
place of the named beneficiary in the event of the beneficiary's
death. Substitution may be indicated by appending to the name
of the primary beneficiary the letters LDPS, standing for
"lineal descendants per stirpes." This designation substitutes
a deceased beneficiary's descendants who survive the owner for a
beneficiary who fails to so survive, the descendants to be
identified and to share in accordance with the law of the
beneficiary's domicile at the owner's death governing
inheritance by descendants of an intestate. Other forms of
identifying beneficiaries who are to take on one (1) or more
contingencies, and rules for providing proofs and assurances
needed to satisfy reasonable concerns by registering entities
regarding conditions and identities relevant to accurate
implementation of registrations in beneficiary form, may be
contained in a registering entity's terms and conditions.

     2-16-112.   Application of act.

This act applies to registrations of securities in beneficiary
form made before or after July 1, 1993, by decedents dying on or
after July 1, 1993.

                 CHAPTER 17 - BURIAL ARRANGEMENTS

     2-17-101. Authority to authorize burial or cremation;
immunity for funeral directors and funeral service
practitioners.

     (a) If a decedent leaves written instructions regarding
his entombment, burial or cremation, or a document that
designates and authorizes another person to direct disposition
of the decedent's body the funeral director or funeral service
practitioner to whom the body is entrusted shall proceed with
the disposition of the body in accordance with those
instructions or the instructions given by the person designated
to direct disposition of the decedent's body. A document that
designates another person to direct disposition of the
decedent's body drafted pursuant to service in the military and
in a form mandated by federal law at the time it was signed
shall be recognized as valid for purposes of this section. In
the event a decedent does not leave written instructions
regarding his entombment, burial or cremation, or fails to leave
a document designating another person to direct disposition of
the decedent's body, the funeral director or funeral service
practitioner to whom the body is entrusted shall obtain a signed
consent before the entombment, burial or cremation proceeds.

     (b) Any of the following persons, in order of priority as
stated, may consent to the entombment, burial or cremation of
the decedent, provided no written instructions or a document
designating another person to direct disposition of the
decedent's body were left by the decedent:
          (i)    The decedent's spouse at the time of death;

          (ii)    An adult child of the decedent;

          (iii)    Either parent of the decedent;

          (iv)    An adult sibling of the decedent;

          (v)    A grandparent of the decedent;

          (vi)    A stepchild of the decedent;

          (vii) A guardian of the decedent in accordance with
W.S. 3-2-201(a)(x).

     (c) If a funeral director or funeral service practitioner
receives written consent from a person specified in subsection
(b) of this section, he may act in accordance with the consent,
unless a person with a higher or equal priority provides the
funeral director or funeral service practitioner a contrary
written consent within three (3) days. If the funeral director
or funeral service practitioner has been provided contrary
written consents from members of the same class with the highest
priority as to the entombment, burial or cremation of the
decedent, the director or funeral service practitioner shall act
in accordance with the directive of the greatest number of
consents received from members of the class. If that number is
equal, the director or funeral service practitioner shall act in
accordance with the earlier consent unless the person providing
the later consent is granted an order from the district court
for the county in which the funeral establishment is located.
The district court shall order disposition in accordance with
the later consent only if it is shown by a preponderance of the
evidence the disposition is in accordance with the decedent's
wishes.

     (d) If the decedent is not survived by any member of the
classes listed or no member of those classes is competent to
sign a consent, any person who comes forward and legitimately
identifies himself as another level of relation or friend of the
decedent is authorized to sign the consent. If no consent is
received within seven (7) days of the decedent's death, the
coroner for the county in which the funeral establishment is
located is authorized to sign the consent.

     (e) A funeral director or funeral service practitioner
acting in accordance with this section, or attempting in good
faith to act in accordance with this section, shall be immune
from civil liability.

     (f) Nothing in this section abrogates or amends the
intestate succession laws of W.S. 2-4-101 through 2-4-214.

 CHAPTER 18 - NONTESTAMENTARY TRANSFER ON DEATH OF REAL PROPERTY

     2-18-101.   Short title.

This chapter shall be known as and may be cited as the
"Nontestamentary Transfer of Real Property on Death Act."

     2-18-102.   Definitions.

     (a)   As used in this chapter:

          (i) "Grantee beneficiary" or "grantee" means the
person to whom an owner grants an interest in the real property
that is the subject of the transfer on death deed;

          (ii) "Owner" means a person who executes a transfer
on death deed as provided in W.S. 2-18-103;

          (iii) "Successor grantee beneficiary" means the
person to whom an owner grants an interest in the real property
that is the subject of the transfer on death deed if the primary
grantee beneficiary does not survive the owner;

          (iv) "Transfer on death deed" means a deed authorized
by W.S. 2-18-103.

     2-18-103.   Transfer on death deed.

     (a) A deed or title that conveys an interest in real or
titled property, including any debt secured by a lien on the
real or titled property, to a grantee beneficiary designated by
the owner and that expressly states that the deed or title is
effective on the death of the owner transfers the deceased
owner's interest to the grantee beneficiary designated by name
in the transfer on death deed or title effective on the death of
the owner, subject to all conveyances, assignments, contracts,
mortgages, deeds of trust, liens, security pledges, and other
encumbrances made by the owner or to which the owner was subject
during the owner's lifetime. The grantee beneficiary also takes
title subject to any interest in the property of which the
grantee beneficiary has either actual or constructive notice.
     (b) A transfer on death deed may designate multiple
grantees who take title as joint tenants with right of
survivorship, tenants in common, or any other tenancy that is
valid under the laws of this state.

     (c) A transfer on death deed may designate a successor
grantee beneficiary. If the transfer on death deed designates a
successor grantee beneficiary, the deed must state the condition
on which the interest of the successor grantee beneficiary would
vest.

     (d) If real property is owned by persons as joint tenants
with the right of survivorship, a deed that conveys an interest
in the real property to a grantee beneficiary designated by all
of the then surviving owners and that expressly states that the
deed is effective on the death of the last surviving owner
transfers the interest to the designated grantee beneficiary
effective on the death of the last surviving owner. If a
transfer on death deed is executed by fewer than all of the
owners of real property owned as joint tenants with right of
survivorship, the transfer on death deed is valid if the last
surviving owner is one of the persons who executes the transfer
on death deed. If the last surviving owner did not execute the
transfer on death deed, the transfer lapses and the deed is
void. An estate in joint tenancy with right of survivorship is
not affected by the execution of a transfer on death deed that
is executed by fewer than all of the owners of the real
property, and the rights of a surviving joint tenant with right
of survivorship prevail over a grantee beneficiary named in a
transfer on death deed.

     (e) A transfer on death deed is valid only if the deed is
executed and recorded, as provided by law, in the office of the
county clerk in the county in which the real property is
situated, before the death of the owner or the last surviving
owner. A transfer on death deed may be used to transfer an
interest in real property to the trustee of a trust even if the
trust is revocable.

     (f) A transfer on death deed may be revoked at any time by
the owner or, if there is more than one (1) owner, by any of the
owners who executed the transfer on death deed. To be effective,
the revocation must be executed and recorded, as provided by
law, in the office of the county clerk in the county in which
the real property is situated, before the death of the owner who
executes the revocation. If the real property is owned as joint
tenants with right of survivorship and if the revocation is not
executed by all the owners who executed the transfer on death
deed, the revocation is not effective unless executed by the
last surviving owner.

     (g) If an individual who is a recipient of medical
assistance for which it would be permissible for the department
of health to file a claim pursuant to W.S. 42-4-206 or to assert
a lien pursuant to W.S. 42-4-207 conveys an interest in real
property by means of a transfer on death deed, the department of
health may assert a lien against the property that is the
subject of the transfer on death deed for the amount which would
have been recoverable against the owner's estate pursuant to
W.S. 42-4-206 and may file a lien against the property pursuant
to W.S. 42-4-207.

     (h) If an owner executes and records more than one (1)
transfer on death deed concerning the same real property, the
last transfer on death deed that is recorded before the owner's
death is the effective transfer on death deed.

     (j) This section does not prohibit other methods of
conveying property that are permitted by law and that have the
effect of postponing enjoyment of an interest in real property
until the death of the owner. This section does not invalidate
any deed otherwise effective by law to convey title to the
interests and estates provided in the deed that is not recorded
until after the death of the owner.

     (k) The signature, consent, or agreement of, or notice to,
a grantee beneficiary of a transfer on death deed is not
required for any purpose during the lifetime of the owner.

     (m) A transfer on death deed that is executed,
acknowledged, and recorded in accordance with this section is
not revoked by the provisions of a will.

     (n) Proof of the death of the owner or a grantee
beneficiary and transfer of ownership of the property by
operation of law shall be established exclusively as follows:

          (i) By recording an affidavit as provided under W.S.
34-11-101 and an accompanying certificate of clearance;

          (ii) The affidavit and accompanying certificate of
clearance shall be recorded in the office of the county clerk of
the county in which the real property is situated. The affidavit
shall identify the transfer on death deed by deed book and page
or document number. The certificate of clearance shall be
issued by the Wyoming department of health and shall certify
that all medical assistance claims have either been satisfied or
do not exist.

     (o) Title to the interest in real property transferred by
a transfer on death deed shall vest in the designated grantee
beneficiary only on the death of the owner. Insurance coverage
applicable to a property that is in force at the time of the
death of the last titled owner shall be transferred and extended
to the designated grantee beneficiary in accordance with W.S.
26-23-109 for a period of up to sixty (60) days following the
date of the death of the last owner, unless the grantee
beneficiary has disclaimed interest in the real property.

     (p) Title to the interest in a vehicle transferred by a
transfer on death title shall vest in the designated grantee
beneficiary only on the death of the owner.

     2-18-104.   Form of transfer on death deed.

A transfer on death deed is sufficient if it complies with other
applicable law and if it is in substantially the following form:

Transfer on Death Deed

I (we) .... (owner) hereby convey to .... (grantee beneficiary)
effective on my (our) death the following described real
property:

(Legal Description)

If a grantee beneficiary predeceases the owner, the conveyance
to that grantee beneficiary must either (choose one):

[ ] Become void.

[ ] Become part of the estate of the grantee beneficiary.

Dated this   .... day of .... year).

............................................

(Signature of grantor(s))

(Acknowledgment)
     2-18-105.   Form for revoking a transfer on death deed.

An instrument revoking a transfer on death deed is sufficient if
it complies with other applicable law and is in substantially
the following form:

Revocation of Transfer on Death Deed

The undersigned hereby revokes the transfer on death deed
recorded on .... (date), in deed book .... on page ...., in the
office of the clerk of .... county, Wyoming, concerning the
following described real property:

(Legal Description)

Dated this .... day of .... (year).

............................................

(Signature of grantor(s))

(Acknowledgment)

     2-18-106.   Disclaimer.

A grantee beneficiary may refuse to accept all or any part of
the real property interest conveyed by a transfer on death deed.
If a grantee beneficiary refuses to accept or disclaims any real
property interest, the grantee beneficiary shall have no
liability under this chapter by reason of being designated as
grantee beneficiary.

