Source URL: https://wyoleg.gov/2013/Enroll/HB0201.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-09-23

ORIGINAL HOUSE                                        ENGROSSED
BILL   NO. 0201

       ENROLLED ACT NO. 94,      HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

       SIXTY-SECOND LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF WYOMING
                    2013 GENERAL SESSION




AN ACT relating to nontestamentary transfers of real
property; providing for the transfer of real property by
deed on death of grantor; creating definitions; specifying
procedures, limitations and exclusions; providing for
revocation of a transfer on death deed; modifying duties of
county clerks accordingly; and providing for an effective
date.

Be It Enacted by the Legislature of the State of Wyoming:

     Section 1.    W.S. 2-18-101 through 2-18-106 are created
to read:

                         CHAPTER 18
     NONTESTAMENTARY TRANSFER ON DEATH OF REAL PROPERTY

     2-18-101.    Short title.

This chapter shall be known as and may be cited as the
"Nontestamentary Transfer of Real Property on Death Act."

     2-18-102.    Definitions.

     (a)   As used in this chapter:

          (i) "Grantee beneficiary" or "grantee" means the
person to whom an owner grants an interest in the real
property that is the subject of the transfer on death deed;

          (ii) "Owner" means a person who executes           a
transfer on death deed as provided in W.S. 2-18-103;

          (iii) "Successor grantee beneficiary" means the
person to whom an owner grants an interest in the real
property that is the subject of the transfer on death deed

                                 1
ORIGINAL HOUSE
BILL   NO. 0201

       ENROLLED ACT NO. 94,    HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

       SIXTY-SECOND LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF WYOMING
                    2013 GENERAL SESSION



if the primary grantee beneficiary does not survive the
owner;

          (iv) "Transfer on      death   deed"   means   a   deed
authorized by W.S. 2-18-103.

    2-18-103.     Transfer on death deed.

     (a) A deed that conveys an interest in real property,
including any debt secured by a lien on real property, to a
grantee beneficiary designated by the owner and that
expressly states that the deed is effective on the death of
the owner transfers the deceased owner's interest to the
grantee beneficiary designated by name in the transfer on
death deed effective on the death of the owner, subject to
all conveyances, assignments, contracts, mortgages, deeds
of trust, liens, security pledges, and other encumbrances
made by the owner or to which the owner was subject during
the owner's lifetime. The grantee beneficiary also takes
title subject to any interest in the property of which the
grantee beneficiary has either actual or constructive
notice.

     (b) A transfer on death deed may designate multiple
grantees who take title as joint tenants with right of
survivorship, tenants in common, or any other tenancy that
is valid under the laws of this state.

     (c) A transfer on death deed may designate a
successor grantee beneficiary. If the transfer on death
deed designates a successor grantee beneficiary, the deed
must state the condition on which the interest of the
successor grantee beneficiary would vest.

     (d) If real property is owned by persons as joint
tenants with the right of survivorship, a deed that conveys

                                  2
ORIGINAL HOUSE
BILL   NO. 0201

       ENROLLED ACT NO. 94,   HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

       SIXTY-SECOND LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF WYOMING
                    2013 GENERAL SESSION



an interest in the real property to a grantee beneficiary
designated by all of the then surviving owners and that
expressly states that the deed is effective on the death of
the last surviving owner transfers the interest to the
designated grantee beneficiary effective on the death of
the last surviving owner. If a transfer on death deed is
executed by fewer than all of the owners of real property
owned as joint tenants with right of survivorship, the
transfer on death deed is valid if the last surviving owner
is one of the persons who executes the transfer on death
deed. If the last surviving owner did not execute the
transfer on death deed, the transfer lapses and the deed is
void. An estate in joint tenancy with right of survivorship
is not affected by the execution of a transfer on death
deed that is executed by fewer than all of the owners of
the real property, and the rights of a surviving joint
tenant with right of survivorship prevail over a grantee
beneficiary named in a transfer on death deed.

     (e) A transfer on death deed is valid only if the
deed is executed and recorded, as provided by law, in the
office of the county clerk in the county in which the real
property is situated, before the death of the owner or the
last surviving owner. A transfer on death deed may be used
to transfer an interest in real property to the trustee of
a trust even if the trust is revocable.

     (f) A transfer on death deed may be revoked at any
time by the owner or, if there is more than one (1) owner,
by any of the owners who executed the transfer on death
deed. To be effective, the revocation must be executed and
recorded, as provided by law, in the office of the county
clerk in the county in which the real property is situated,
before the death of the owner who executes the revocation.
If the real property is owned as joint tenants with right
of survivorship and if the revocation is not executed by

                                3
ORIGINAL HOUSE
BILL   NO. 0201

       ENROLLED ACT NO. 94,   HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

       SIXTY-SECOND LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF WYOMING
                    2013 GENERAL SESSION



all the owners who executed the transfer on death deed, the
revocation is not effective unless executed by the last
surviving owner.

     (g) If an individual who is a recipient of medical
assistance for which it would be permissible for the
department of health to file a claim pursuant to W.S.
42-4-206 or to assert a lien pursuant to W.S. 42-4-207
conveys an interest in real property by means of a transfer
on death deed, the department of health may assert a lien
against the property that is the subject of the transfer on
death deed for the amount which would have been recoverable
against the owner's estate pursuant to W.S. 42-4-206 and
may file a lien against the property pursuant to W.S.
42-4-207.

      (h) If an owner executes and records more than one
(1) transfer on death deed concerning the same real
property, the last transfer on death deed that is recorded
before the owner's death is the effective transfer on death
deed.

     (j) This section does not prohibit other methods of
conveying property that are permitted by law and that have
the effect of postponing enjoyment of an interest in real
property until the death of the owner. This section does
not invalidate any deed otherwise effective by law to
convey title to the interests and estates provided in the
deed that is not recorded until after the death of the
owner.

     (k) The signature, consent, or agreement of, or
notice to, a grantee beneficiary of a transfer on death
deed is not required for any purpose during the lifetime of
the owner.


                                4
ORIGINAL HOUSE
BILL   NO. 0201

       ENROLLED ACT NO. 94,    HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

       SIXTY-SECOND LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF WYOMING
                    2013 GENERAL SESSION



     (m) A transfer on death deed that is executed,
acknowledged, and recorded in accordance with this section
is not revoked by the provisions of a will.

     (n) Proof of the death of the owner or a grantee
beneficiary shall be established by affidavit as provided
under W.S. 34-11-101.   The affidavit shall be recorded in
the office of the county clerk of the county in which the
real property is situated. No affidavit shall be recorded
unless a certificate of clearance, issued by the Wyoming
department of health, certifies that all medical assistance
claims have either been satisfied or do not exist.      The
certificate of clearance shall be simultaneously submitted
with the affidavit for filing.

     (o) Title   to   the   interest  in   real   property
transferred by a transfer on death deed shall vest in the
designated grantee beneficiary only on the death of the
owner.

    2-18-104.     Form of transfer on death deed.

A transfer on death deed is sufficient if it complies with
other applicable law and if it is in substantially the
following form:

                       Transfer on Death Deed

     I (we) .... (owner) hereby convey to .... (grantee
beneficiary) effective on my (our) death the following
described real property:

                         (Legal Description)




                                  5
ORIGINAL HOUSE
BILL   NO. 0201

       ENROLLED ACT NO. 94,    HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

       SIXTY-SECOND LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF WYOMING
                    2013 GENERAL SESSION



      If a grantee beneficiary predeceases the owner, the
conveyance to that grantee beneficiary must either (choose
one):

          [ ] Become void.

           [ ] Become part of the estate of the grantee
beneficiary.

    Dated this .... day of .... year).
    ............................................
    (Signature of grantor(s))

    (Acknowledgment)

    2-18-105.     Form for revoking a transfer on death deed.

An instrument revoking a transfer on death deed is
sufficient if it complies with other applicable law and is
in substantially the following form:

                Revocation of Transfer on Death Deed

     The undersigned hereby revokes the transfer on death
deed recorded on .... (date), in deed book .... on page
...., in the office of the clerk of .... county, Wyoming,
concerning the following described real property:

                         (Legal Description)

    Dated this .... day of .... (year).
    ............................................
    (Signature of grantor(s))

    (Acknowledgment)


                                  6
ORIGINAL HOUSE
BILL   NO. 0201

       ENROLLED ACT NO. 94,     HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

       SIXTY-SECOND LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF WYOMING
                    2013 GENERAL SESSION



    2-18-106.     Disclaimer.

A grantee beneficiary may refuse to accept all or any part
of the real property interest conveyed by a transfer on
death deed. If a grantee beneficiary refuses to accept or
disclaims   any   real   property  interest,   the grantee
beneficiary shall have no liability under this chapter by
reason of being designated as grantee beneficiary.

     Section 2. W.S. 34-1-119 and 42-4-207 by creating a
new subsection (k) are amended to read:

    34-1-119.   Duties of county clerk generally.

     (a) The county clerk of each county within this state
shall receive and record at length all deeds, mortgages,
conveyances, patents, certificates and instruments left
with him for that purpose, and he shall endorse on every
such instrument the day and hour on which it was filed for
record. The county clerk shall not record any document
until the address of the grantee, mortgagee or assignee of
the mortgagee is furnished to the county clerk, but this
requirement shall not affect the validity of the recording
of   any  instrument.  Only  instruments   which  are  the
originally signed documents or properly certified or
authenticated copies thereof may be properly recorded. A
document is properly certified if in compliance with Rule
902 of the Wyoming Rules of Evidence or other applicable
rule or statute.

     (b) Whenever a transfer on death deed is filed with
the county clerk pursuant to W.S. 2-18-103, the county clerk
shall furnish the following information to the Wyoming
department of health, division of healthcare financing
within fourteen (14) days of recording the deed:

         (i)    The name of the grantor;

                                  7
ORIGINAL HOUSE
BILL   NO. 0201

       ENROLLED ACT NO. 94,    HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

       SIXTY-SECOND LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF WYOMING
                    2013 GENERAL SESSION




          (ii)    The name of the grantee;
          (iii)    The legal description of the property being
transferred.

     42-4-207. Recovery of incorrect payments; recovery of
correct payments; liens.

     (k) The department may file a lien upon real property
pursuant to W.S. 2-18-103(g) upon the death of the grantor.
The department may file such lien regardless of whether the
grantee applied for a certificate of clearance pursuant to
W.S. 2-18-103(n) or filed an affidavit to establish the
death of the grantor pursuant to W.S. 34-11-101.




                                  8
ORIGINAL HOUSE
BILL   NO. 0201

       ENROLLED ACT NO. 94,    HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

       SIXTY-SECOND LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF WYOMING
                    2013 GENERAL SESSION



     Section 3.   This act is effective July 1, 2013.

                              (END)




Speaker of the House                  President of the Senate


                           Governor

                  TIME APPROVED: _________

                  DATE APPROVED: _________

I hereby certify that this act originated in the House.


Chief Clerk




                                  9

