Source URL: https://wyoleg.gov/statutes/compress/title42.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-09-23

                         TITLE 42 - WELFARE

                   CHAPTER 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS

                       ARTICLE 1 - IN GENERAL

    42-1-101.     Definitions; generally.

    (a)   As used in this title:

          (i) "Applicant" means any person applying for
benefits under programs provided pursuant to this title;

          (ii) "Department" means the department of family
services unless otherwise specified;

          (iii)   Repealed by Laws 1991, ch. 161, § 4.

          (iv) "Field office" means each field office of the
department located within each county or region of the state;

          (v) "Recipient" means any person receiving benefits
under programs provided pursuant to this title.

    42-1-102.     Conflict with federal laws.

     (a) If any provision of this title or W.S. 14-2-1001
through 14-2-1008 is found to be in conflict with federal law or
to come in conflict with federal law due to new federal
enactments, the department shall:

          (i) Follow the state rather than the federal law to
the extent possible without incurring federal sanctions;

          (ii) Seek any waivers from the federal government
which appear to be appropriate and feasible to permit continued
use of the provisions of state law;

          (iii) Notify the joint labor, health and social
services interim committee and the legislature of the conflict
and the steps necessary to resolve the conflict; and

          (iv) If necessary to avoid federal sanctions with
significant adverse effects on the state or the people of
Wyoming, implement the federal law until sixty (60) days after
the end of the general or budget legislative session following
the discovery of the conflict. This period may be extended by
the governor until sixty (60) days after the end of the next
legislative session if a waiver request is pending before the
appropriate federal agency at the start of a legislative
session.

       CHAPTER 2 - PUBLIC ASSISTANCE AND SOCIAL SERVICES

                     ARTICLE 1 - IN GENERAL

    42-2-101.   Short title.

This article may be cited as the "Wyoming Public Assistance and
Social Services Act".

    42-2-102.   Definitions.

     (a) Except as otherwise specifically provided, as used in
this article:

          (i) "Commodities" means foods donated or available
for donation by the department;

          (ii) "Coupon" means any coupon, stamp or other type
of certificate provided for the purchase of eligible food as
defined by the supplemental nutrition assistance program;

          (iii) "Electronic benefit transfer" means a system
for the supplemental nutrition assistance program as an
alternative to issuing a supplemental nutrition assistance
program card. An electronic benefit transfer system is a
computer-based system in which the benefit authorization is
received through a point of sale terminal. Eligible households
utilize plastic cards in lieu of supplemental nutrition
assistance program coupons to purchase food items at authorized
food retailers. This type of benefit may also be used to issue
other types of public welfare benefits;

          (iv) "Supplemental nutrition assistance program
benefit" means assistance provided by the supplemental nutrition
assistance program to eligible households in the form of
coupons, electronic benefit transfers or cash that are
redeemable at federally approved food retailers;

          (v) "Performance payment" means an amount payable to
or on behalf of an eligible recipient;
          (vi) "Public assistance" means financial assistance
in the form of a performance payment, vendor payment,
supplemental nutrition assistance program benefits or a payment
under the minimum medical program;

          (vii) "Public welfare benefit" means financial
assistance provided to eligible persons in the form of a
performance payment, vendor payment, supplemental nutrition
assistance program benefit, electronic benefit transfer or cash.
These benefits may be received from several state or federal
welfare programs including:

              (A)   Medicaid;

              (B)   Repealed by Laws 2017, ch. 108, § 2.

              (C)   Repealed by Laws 2017, ch. 108, § 2.

              (D)   Low income energy assistance program;

              (E)   Minimum medical program;

              (F)   Child care program;

               (G) Personal opportunities with employment
responsibilities (POWER);

              (H)   Supplemental nutrition assistance program.

          (viii) "Social services" mean services specifically
authorized by the legislature, defined by the comprehensive
social services plan of the department and provided or purchased
in accordance with this act;

          (ix) "Approved educational program" means any program
at the University of Wyoming or a Wyoming community college
leading to a baccalaureate, associate degree, or certificate at
the school or a vocational program approved by the department,
or other accredited educational program within Wyoming leading
to a baccalaureate, associate degree or nationally recognized
certification or license. The department, may, by rule and
regulation specify particular courses of study or majors that do
not generally lead to employment and are not approved
educational programs.
     42-2-103. Provision of assistance and services; duties of
department; burial assistance; department of health state
supplemental security income program.

     (a) The department shall provide and administer programs
for public assistance and social services in Wyoming to those
individuals lacking sufficient income or resources to provide
themselves or their families with a reasonable subsistence
compatible with decency and health or with services necessary
for their well-being.

     (b) In carrying out subsection (a) of this section and
except as provided under the Wyoming Medical Assistance and
Services Act, the department shall:

         (i)   Repealed by Laws 2017, ch. 179, § 2.

          (ii) Establish policies and standards for the
provision of public assistance and social services in accordance
with this article and federal law and regulation;

          (iii) Except as otherwise provided by law, establish
by rule and regulation payment amounts and service levels for
public assistance and social services programs provided under
this article based upon the financial condition of the
individual applicant or recipient;

          (iv) Supervise the expenditure of state funds and
federal funds allocated to the state for purposes of providing
public assistance and social services in such a manner as to
ensure that, to the extent funds are available and authorized by
the legislature, funds may be used in separate state-funded
programs to:

               (A) Use, to the extent practicable, state
maintenance of effort funds in a separate state funded program
to provide public assistance to eligible individuals who have
exhausted their benefits under the federal temporary assistance
to needy families block grant and are exempt from the five (5)
year limitation under paragraph (e)(i) of this section;

               (B)   Repealed by Laws 2017, ch. 108, § 2.

               (C) Allow an individual receiving assistance to
attend school as provided by W.S. 42-2-109(a) provided the
individual:
                    (I) Has completed an employment assessment
conducted under department rule or regulation;

                    (II) Meets the income and resource
eligibility requirements of the personal opportunities with
employment responsibilities (POWER) program;

                    (III) Qualifies as a full-time student
under W.S. 42-2-109(a)(ii)(A) and (C).

          (v) Cooperate with and report to the United States
department of health and human services and other federal
agencies as necessary to qualify the state for federal funding
for public assistance and social services and comply with
federal law and regulations governing the administration and
expenditure of federal funds allocated to the state;

          (vi) Serve as an agent of the federal government in
matters of mutual concern and in the administration of federal
funds allocated to the state for public assistance and social
services;

          (vii) Cooperate with other agencies as necessary to
administer this article;

          (viii) Limit approved educational programs under
paragraph (iv) of this subsection to educational courses not to
exceed the baccalaureate level, or to one (1) vocational
training program;

          (ix) Amend the state plan submitted to the United
States department of health and human services to provide that
the state elects as authorized by section 402(1)(A)(ii) of P.L.
104-193 to define work as including all activities permitted
under section 407 of P.L. 104-193 plus satisfactory full-time
school attendance as defined by W.S. 42-2-109;

          (x) To the extent funds are available and authorized
by the legislature and if full-time students as defined by W.S.
42-2-109 are required by federal law or regulation to work in
addition to attending school full-time, create a state funds
only program using funds required for maintenance of effort to
provide assistance to such students.   Such a program shall take
priority over other uses of the maintenance of effort funds
available;
          (xi) Not discriminate against married couples with
one (1) or more dependent children applying for assistance,
provided the department may maintain work requirements for
married couples consistent with the federal requirements for
work participation for two (2) parent families;

          (xii) Provide benefits under the personal
opportunities with employment responsibilities (POWER) program
to permanent resident aliens lawfully admitted to the United
States under the Immigration and Nationality Act, as allowed
under section 402 of P.L. 104-193;

          (xiii) Exempt individuals domiciled in Wyoming from
the application of section 115, subsection (a) of P.L. 104-193
allowing payment of benefits under the personal opportunities
with employment responsibilities program (POWER) and the
supplemental nutrition assistance program;

          (xiv) Promulgate and adopt rules and regulations
necessary to carry out this article;

          (xv) Subject to the availability of funds, provide to
recipients in an approved education program under W.S.
42-2-109(a) at least two (2) hours of dependent day care, if
needed, for each hour the applicant is required to be in class,
laboratory or other required instructional activity;

          (xvi) Conduct the eligibility and identity
verification process as provided in W.S. 42-10-101 through
42-10-107.

Note: Effective 1/1/2027 this paragraph will read as:

          (xvi) Conduct the applicable eligibility and identity
verification process as provided in W.S. 42-10-101 through 42-
10-110.

     (c) Notwithstanding any other provision of this article
and subject to the availability of funds, the department shall
pay the burial or cremation expenses of any recipient of aid
under the personal opportunities with employment
responsibilities (POWER) program, supplemental security income
or Medicaid at the time of his death and without sufficient
means in his own estate or other resources to provide burial or
cremation. The amount paid under this subsection shall not
exceed one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) after
consideration of funds available to the recipient from all other
sources. In addition to the amount paid for burial or cremation
under this subsection, an amount shall be paid for
transportation expenses to the veteran's cemetery for a deceased
veteran who qualifies for burial there and who qualifies for
burial expenses under this subsection in an amount not to exceed
five hundred dollars ($500.00). In determining eligibility under
this subsection, the department shall not consider as available
funds, an amount up to or equal to one thousand five hundred
dollars ($1,500.00) of the corpus of a Medicaid qualifying trust
meeting the requirements of W.S. 42-4-113. No board of county
commissioners shall be responsible for any burial or cremation
expenses in excess of the amount paid under this subsection.
Burial or cremation expenses under this subsection shall not
include those expenses relating to cemetery costs.

     (d) The department of health shall, by rule, administer a
state supplemental security income program entitling any
individual receiving payments under the federal supplemental
security income program with no other income during any one (1)
calendar month, to a payment for each month the condition
exists. The monthly payment under this subsection shall be
established by the legislature within the department of health's
biennial budget appropriation, which shall not be less than the
required payment under applicable federal law. Rules
promulgated in accordance with this subsection shall include
procedures for applying, approving, reviewing and terminating
assistance under this subsection. Decisions of the department
of health under this subsection regarding entitlement to
payments shall be subject to the contested case procedures of
the Wyoming Administrative Procedure Act.

     (e) In administering this section and in addition to other
requirements imposed under this chapter and the Wyoming Medical
Assistance and Services Act and federal rule and regulation, the
department shall by rule and regulation:

          (i) Limit assistance payable under W.S. 42-2-104 to
five (5) years for any assistance unit within a lifetime,
regardless of location. Time spent on assistance funded with
federal funds and time spent on assistance funded with state
funds, shall be added together in determining the time spent on
assistance for the purposes of this section. Adults who
previously received assistance as a dependent child, excluding
minor parents, shall be allowed up to the five (5) year lifetime
limit under their own assistance unit. For minor parents only,
one (1) year in the personal opportunities with employment
responsibilities (POWER) program prior to reaching the age of
majority shall be counted against the five (5) year lifetime
limit. Months of assistance received for an eligible dependent
child by a nonparent caretaker relative who is not included in
the calculation of the performance payment to the dependent
child shall not count toward the nonparent caretaker relative's
lifetime limit. Individuals who have received assistance under
W.S. 42-2-104 for three (3) or more years as of January 1, 1997,
shall be eligible for two (2) additional years of assistance
used after January 1, 1997. Any individual who is totally
physically or mentally disabled as specified by department
rules, or who is a caretaker and stays at home to provide full-
time care for a totally disabled or incapacitated immediate
family member who resides with the caretaker because no other
reasonable alternative, as determined by the department, is
available to provide care and who otherwise qualifies for
assistance under W.S. 42-2-104 shall not be subject to the
limitation imposed under this paragraph. For an individual who
is such a caretaker, the department shall waive any work
requirements that unduly interfere with the provision of care
and may waive other program requirements as appropriate. For
purposes of this section an individual is totally disabled or
incapacitated if he has a physical or mental impairment to the
extent that it prevents the individual from achieving
independent living, full-time employment, or participation in
job training programs that will reasonably lead to independent
living and monetary self sufficiency. The department may consult
a licensed physician or other appropriate professional to make
its determination of disability or incapacitation. Nothing in
this paragraph shall prohibit the department from requiring
recipients to maintain, improve or enhance employment and
self-sufficiency efforts and activities. The department shall
waive time limits, and may waive other program requirements as
provided in paragraph (viii) of this subsection, as allowed
under sections 402(a)(7)(A)(iii) and 408(a)(7)(A)(iii) of the
federal Social Security Act, as amended by P.L. 104-193, for a
period not to exceed two (2) years for individuals who are
fleeing for personal safety or for the safety of their children
or who have been victimized by domestic violence or who are at
risk of further domestic violence. The department may extend
assistance up to one (1) year under either the federal or state
program in addition to the five (5) year limitation imposed
under this paragraph for the following reasons:

              (A)   Repealed by Laws 1997, ch. 196, § 2.
               (B) Continuation of education leading toward an
associate or a baccalaureate degree under the state funded
program only;

              (C)     Abandonment.

          (ii) Require an unmarried parent under the age of
eighteen (18) and the dependent child of the minor parent to
reside in the household of a parent or in a supervised setting
with an adult relative or court appointed guardian or custodian
in order to qualify for assistance under W.S. 42-2-104, unless
the minor parent is emancipated under law. Assistance under
this paragraph shall be payable to the parent, relative or court
appointed guardian or custodian on behalf of the minor parent
and the dependent child. The income and resources of the parents
shall be considered in determining eligibility for assistance
under W.S. 42-2-104. If the minor custodial parent is living
with a qualified person other than a parent and except for
exemptions specified by department rule and regulation, the
department shall through local child support enforcement
agencies, enforce child support obligations of the parents of
each minor parent, including the parents of the noncustodial
minor parent. The department shall waive the requirements of
this subsection if the only available households contain an
individual who has been convicted of violating W.S. 6-4-402 or
who has been charged with violating W.S. 6-4-402 and the charges
have not received final disposition. The department shall assist
law enforcement officials and the family of a minor mother to
pursue the filing of criminal charges against the father of the
minor mother's child if the minor mother conceived her child
while under sixteen (16) years of age and the father was at
least four (4) years older than the minor mother at the time of
conception;

          (iii) Limit assistance payable under W.S. 42-2-104
for the year 2008 as follows:

Family Size           Cumulative Inflation     Maximum POWER

              Factor                 Payment

    1         1.489                  $290

    2         1.489                  476

    3         1.489                  506
    4         1.489                506

    5         1.489                536

    6         1.489                536

    7 and above       1.489        566

Beginning July 1, 2009 and annually thereafter, the maximum
payment level shall be adjusted for the percentage change in the
Wyoming cost-of-living index for the previous fiscal year as
determined by the division of economic analysis of the
department of administration and information.

          (iv) Establish only one (1) earned income disregard
for determining assistance payable under W.S. 42-2-104 at six
hundred dollars ($600.00) per month for any one (1) recipient.
For married couples the earned income disregard shall be one
thousand two hundred dollars ($1,200.00) per month. The
department may in addition establish an additional individual
earned income disregard tailored to the individual person as
part of that person's self-sufficiency plan developed pursuant
to paragraph (v) of this subsection, provided:

               (A) Such an individual earned income disregard
shall be available only during time periods when the person is
working at paid employment enough average number of hours per
week to qualify as working for the purposes of section 407 of
P.L. 104-193;

               (B) The amount disregarded shall not exceed six
dollars and fifty cents ($6.50) per hour except that in high
cost of living areas as defined by the department it shall not
exceed seven dollars and fifty cents ($7.50) per hour;

               (C) The disregard shall be structured to allow
one-half (1/2) of the person's preemployment personal
opportunities with employment responsibilities (POWER) grant for
a period not to exceed six (6) months and one-quarter (1/4) of
the personal opportunities with employment responsibilities
(POWER) grant for an additional period not to exceed six (6)
months;

               (D) The one-half (1/2) grant in the first period
may be paid from either state funds or federal funds and shall
count toward the five (5) year limit established by W.S. 42-2-
103(e). The one-quarter (1/4) grant in the second period shall
be paid from state maintenance of effort funds and shall not be
subject to the time limits established by W.S. 42-2-103(e);

               (E) The use of the individual earned income
disregard may be conditioned upon successful completion of other
portions of the person's self-sufficiency plan;

               (F) The decision to allow an individual earned
income disregard in a particular case is discretionary with the
department and the department's decision is not subject to
judicial review;

               (G) The individual earned income disregard shall
be used only to the extent the department determines funds are
available and are not needed for other purposes with higher
priority.

          (v) In accordance with guidelines and criteria
prescribed by rule and regulation of the department and unless
otherwise qualifying for a good cause exemption pursuant to rule
and regulation of the department, require the development of and
adherence to a self-sufficiency plan with guidelines and
assistance provided by the department, as a condition for
benefit eligibility under the personal opportunities with
employment responsibilities (POWER) program. A self-sufficiency
plan including timely completion of an approved educational
program complying with W.S. 42-2-109(a) shall be deemed to meet
the requirements of this subsection if adhered to. Any person
not qualifying for a good cause exemption and failing to comply
with this paragraph shall be sanctioned under the personal
opportunities with employment responsibilities (POWER) program.
Subject to procedure prescribed by department regulation, any
recipient may at any time request a good cause exemption from
the requirements of this section;

          (vi) Impose time limitations on educational goals of
recipients of assistance under W.S. 42-2-104 who are under
twenty (20) years of age and have not obtained a high school
diploma or general equivalency degree;

          (vii) Require that applicants and current recipients
cooperate within a period specified by department rules to
establish paternity and child support obligations, subject to
good cause exceptions established by department rules and
regulations. The applicant shall not be eligible for personal
opportunities with employment responsibilities benefits and a
recipient shall not receive benefits until the applicant or
recipient has cooperated as required under this paragraph;

          (viii) Provide that the department may waive program
requirements, other than time limits which shall be waived under
paragraph (i) of this subsection, for individuals who are
fleeing for personal safety or for the safety of their children
or who have been victimized by domestic violence, or who are at
risk of further domestic violence, as follows:

               (A) Work participation requirements or state
postsecondary education program restrictions may be waived for
one (1) year, without re-evaluation, for individuals who have
not exhausted their benefits under the federal temporary
assistance to needy families block grant. Program requirements
under this paragraph may not be waived for longer than:

                    (I) One (1) year, unless the recipient's
circumstances are re-evaluated at six (6) month intervals after
the first year;

                    (II) Two (2) years, unless the recipient
meets the requirements of subdivision (I) of this subparagraph
and is cooperating in the development and implementation of a
plan with the department and the local domestic violence agency
to correct circumstances which have contributed to the domestic
violence or the threat of domestic violence.

               (B) For individuals who have exhausted their
benefits under the federal temporary assistance to needy
families block grant, program requirements under this paragraph
may be waived by the department only if the individual's
circumstances are re-evaluated at six (6) month intervals and,
after one (1) year, the individual is cooperating in the
development and implementation of a plan with the department and
the local domestic violence agency to correct circumstances
which have contributed to the domestic violence or threat of
domestic violence.

     (f) In administering the child care and development fund
provided for in the federal Child Care and Development Block
Grant Act, and subject to approval of a state plan amendment by
the administration of children and families of the United States
department of health and human services, the department shall:
          (i) Annually by April 1 establish the hourly
copayment required to be paid by parents for each eligible
child, subject to the following:

               (A) Households with income at or below one
hundred percent (100%) of the federal poverty level shall not be
required to make a copayment;

               (B) For households with income above one hundred
percent (100%) up to two hundred twenty-five percent (225%) of
the federal poverty level, the copayment shall be calculated
based on the following table. For each category of income in
the first column, the parents' hourly copayment per child shall
be determined by multiplying the annual income dollar amount for
a family of two (2) that corresponds with the percentage of
federal poverty level in the second column by the multiplier in
the third column, then dividing by two thousand three hundred
forty (2,340), the annual number of hours of child care required
by a full-time working parent, and rounding the result to the
nearest five cents ($.05):

Household Category   Federal Poverty       Multiplier

    of Income        Level Income Factor

101% - 125%     113% 1.25%

126% - 150%     138% 2.00%

151% - 175%     163% 7%

176% - 200%     188% 9%

201% - 225%     213% 12%

               (C) In determining eligibility, the department
shall use the most recent federal poverty guidelines for the
applicant's household size and income. In determining the
hourly copayment for each eligible child, the department shall
use the appropriate category of income in which the household
qualifies;

               (D) If the department determines that funding
will be inadequate to implement the child care and development
fund for the balance of the appropriation period, the department
may increase copayments as calculated by subparagraph (B) of
this paragraph by ten percent (10%) for households whose income
is less than two hundred percent (200%) of the federal poverty
level and by twenty percent (20%) for households whose income is
equal to or above two hundred percent (200%) of the federal
poverty level.

          (ii) From funds available under the American Recovery
and Reinvestment Act of 2009, any funds not needed for
completion of the electronic benefit transfer system shall be
used to make grants for materials and supplies to child care
facilities, provided however that a facility receiving a grant
shall agree in writing to provide not less than twenty-five
percent (25%) of the facility's available care to persons
determined eligible under paragraph (i) of this subsection, for
a period commensurate with the amount of the grant as determined
by rule and regulation of the department, or to repay any monies
granted under this paragraph to the state of Wyoming plus
interest at the rate of ten percent (10%) per annum;

          (iii) If the department determines that eligibility
for other social services programs changes in ways that require
a change in the formula provided by paragraph (i) of this
subsection, the department shall report the change together with
recommended legislation to the joint labor health and social
services interim committee.

     42-2-104. Personal opportunities with employment
responsibilities; provision; eligibility; unemployed parent
program.

     (a) The department may through the personal opportunities
with employment responsibilities (POWER) program provide
financial assistance for a dependent child and an eligible
caretaker. Financial assistance under this program shall be in
the form of a performance payment or protective payment payable
to or on behalf of an eligible recipient. Any individual not a
relative of the dependent child but interested in or concerned
with the welfare of the child and his eligible caretaker may
subject to qualifications prescribed by rule and regulation of
the department, receive a protective payment on behalf of the
dependent child which shall not count toward the caretaker's
five (5) year limit for benefits under W.S. 42-2-103(e)(i)
unless the nonrelative caretaker is included in the calculation
of the performance payment of the dependent child.

     (b) In addition to any other state or federal regulation
and subject to W.S. 42-2-103(e), an assistance unit qualifying
under W.S. 42-2-103(a) with a dependent child is eligible for
financial assistance under the personal opportunities with
employment responsibilities (POWER) program. For purposes of
this subsection, a dependent child includes any child who is
under eighteen (18) years of age and living with a relative in a
residence maintained by the relative as determined by rule and
regulation of the department, regularly attending school or its
equivalent as determined by the department, or is expected to
graduate from high school before the age of nineteen (19) years.
For purposes of this subsection, a dependent child does not
include a minor parent.

          (i)    Repealed By Laws 1997, ch. 196, § 2.

          (ii)   Repealed By Laws 1997, ch. 196, § 2.

    (c)   Repealed By Laws 1997, ch. 196, § 2.

     (d) Subject to the availability of funds, the department
may by rule and regulation create a program to provide financial
assistance to assistance units in which there is a dependent
child and both of the parents are unemployed.

     42-2-105. Application for assistance and services;
investigation of applicant.

     (a) An individual or other person on his behalf may apply
in writing for public assistance and social services under this
article to the field office of the department located within the
county or region in which the individual resides. A relative or
other person interested in the welfare of a dependent child and
his family may apply for the child. Application shall be upon a
form and in a manner prescribed by rule and regulation of the
department.

     (b) Upon receipt of an application under subsection (a) of
this section, the department shall investigate the facts stated
in the application and obtain necessary information to determine
eligibility for public assistance and social services.

     42-2-106. Approval or disapproval of application;
notification of applicant; amount and form of assistance and
services.

     (a) Based upon the eligibility of an applicant, the
department shall approve or disapprove each application for
public assistance or social services filed with its field
offices pursuant to W.S. 42-2-105 and shall notify the applicant
of its decision. Eligibility determinations for public
assistance under this chapter shall be made separately from
eligibility determinations for medical assistance under Title
XIX of the federal Social Security Act.

     (b) Upon approval and in accordance with this article and
its rules and regulations, the department shall determine the
form, amount and commencement date of public assistance and
social services for each approved application. In determining
the amount of public assistance and social services for
applicants who receive a housing subsidy, for households with a
supplemental security income recipient or for unmarried minor
parent applicants, the department shall take into consideration
the supplied shelter tables as established in its rules and
regulations.

     (c) In any assistance program under this chapter for which
income is the criterion or one (1) of the criteria for
assistance payments, compensation received for a veteran's
service connected disability shall not be counted in determining
income if that compensation on an annual basis is not more than
the poverty level for the applicant as determined by the federal
office of management and budget.

     (d) When the department approves an application for public
assistance under the personal opportunities with employment
responsibilities (POWER) program, it shall inform the approved
applicant of the opportunity to continue to receive benefits
under the program while participating in an approved educational
program, provided the person is accepted into the approved
educational program and otherwise continues to meet eligibility
requirements of both programs.

     42-2-107.   Payment of assistance; custodian for incompetent
recipients.

     (a) Public assistance and social services approved under
this article:

          (i) May be provided in the form of a performance
payment or other financial assistance, in the home of the
applicant, in an institution or in any other manner or form
determined appropriate by rule and regulation of the department;

          (ii) Shall be provided to the recipient until
terminated or modified pursuant to this article;
          (iii) Shall be provided to qualified recipients who
move to Wyoming from other states, except the amount of the
performance payment or other financial assistance for the first
twelve (12) months of eligibility in Wyoming may, at the option
of the department, be the lesser of:

               (A) The amount of assistance for which the
recipient would be entitled in Wyoming; or

               (B) The amount of the assistance the recipient
would be receiving in the state of prior residence.

     (b) A performance payment or any other form of public
assistance shall be payable to the recipient or to a custodian
or a vendor on behalf of the recipient. If the recipient is
determined incompetent for purposes of using the public
assistance provided under this article in the most beneficial
manner, the amount may be payable to a custodian of the
recipient. Subject to approval of the department, the custodian
may receive and dispose of the public assistance on behalf of
the recipient and shall report quarterly to the department
providing a detailed accounting of his management of the amounts
received under this subsection. The department shall review the
report, determine if the conduct of the custodian is in the best
interests of the recipient and file a copy of the report in the
recipient's case record.

     42-2-108. Continuous assistance to recipient changing
residence to another county; assistance provided to
nonresidents; termination upon leaving state.

     (a) The department shall provide for the continuous and
uninterrupted receipt of approved public assistance and social
services by any eligible recipient changing his residence from
one (1) county to another county in the state until otherwise
terminated or modified in accordance with this article.

     (b) Any transient or nonresident of the state may receive
public assistance or social services provided under this article
if approved in accordance with this article. The department may
require the transient or nonresident to pay his transportation
and expenses if he possesses property, income or other resources
other than personal effects necessary for decency and health.

     (c) Public assistance or social services shall be
terminated in the manner prescribed by rule and regulation of
the department for any recipient moving to another state.
     42-2-109. Review of assistance and services; termination
or modification; notice to department of change in assets.

     (a) Public assistance and social services provided under
this article shall be reviewed at least once each year, except
for recipients enrolled in an approved educational program which
shall be reviewed once every six (6) months. An approved
educational program under this section shall be limited to
educational courses not to exceed the baccalaureate degree
level. After review, the department may continue, modify or
terminate public assistance and social services in accordance
with the circumstances of the recipient and the provisions of
this article. Review of recipients in an approved educational
program pursuant to this subsection shall require that
recipients:

          (i) To maintain a "C" or equivalent cumulative grade
point average in the approved educational program;

         (ii)   Be enrolled as a full-time student, provided:

               (A) To qualify as a full-time student under this
paragraph, the student shall be enrolled for a minimum of twelve
(12) credit hours per semester or activities that equal twelve
(12) credit hours as defined by the institution and complete
twenty-four (24) or more credit hours per year or activities
that equal twenty-four (24) credit hours per year as defined by
the institution in an approved educational program;

               (B) A full-time student qualifying under this
paragraph is exempt from any work or community service
requirement under this article, except as provided in paragraph
(iii) of this subsection;

               (C) To qualify under this paragraph, the full-
time student shall be a Wyoming resident in accordance with
guidelines and criteria prescribed by rule and regulation of the
department.

          (iii) From the end of the spring semester to the
beginning of the fall semester, work at least thirty-two (32)
hours per week for at least ten (10) weeks or successfully
complete six (6) credit hours. The department may waive this
requirement for good cause.

         (iv)   Repealed by Laws 2005, ch. 238, § 2.
     (b) Upon gaining possession of any property, income or
other assets after receiving any public assistance and social
services under this article, a recipient shall notify the
department not later than ten (10) calendar days after becoming
aware of the change in circumstances. The amount of public
assistance and social services provided to the recipient shall
be accordingly terminated or modified pursuant to rule and
regulation of the department. The department shall exempt not
more than two (2) licensed motor vehicles from personal assets
in determining eligibility for any household under the personal
opportunities with employment responsibilities (POWER) program.

    (c)   Repealed By Laws 1997, ch. 196, § 2.

    42-2-110.   Administrative and judicial review.

     (a) An applicant or recipient whose application is not
acted upon within a reasonable time following the date of
application or who is aggrieved by any determination for the
provision, amount, modification or termination of public
assistance and social services under this article may appeal to
the department in a manner and form prescribed by the
department. The department shall provide the applicant or
recipient reasonable notice in accordance with its rules and
regulations and shall provide opportunity for hearing pursuant
to the Wyoming Administrative Procedure Act. Following
conclusion of the hearing, the department shall render a final
decision.

     (b) A decision of the department may be appealed to the
district court as provided by the Wyoming Administrative
Procedure Act.

     42-2-111. Prohibited disclosure and use of records;
penalty; judicial discovery.

     (a) Except as provided in this section, no person shall
disclose, receive, use or knowingly permit or participate in the
use of any information derived from records maintained pursuant
to law or acquired in the performance of duties under this
article for purposes not directly related to the administration
of this article.

     (b) A violation of subsection (a) of this section is a
misdemeanor.
     (c) In accordance with the Wyoming Rules of Civil
Procedure, any county or district court may subpoena the records
maintained under this article and require the testimony of
personnel involved in the administration of this article which
is pertinent to any proceeding involving the:

          (i) Custody, welfare or interest of any minor
receiving public assistance and social services under this
article;

         (ii)   Termination of parental rights as provided by
law;

          (iii) Prosecution of any person for a crime connected
with obtaining public assistance and social services;

         (iv)   Foreclosure of liens held by the department.

     (d) Upon request of a federal, state or local law
enforcement officer as defined by federal statute and W.S.
9-1-701(a)(vi), the department may furnish the requesting
officer the current address of any recipient under the personal
opportunities with employment responsibilities (POWER) program
if the requesting officer:

          (i) Furnishes the department with the name of the
recipient; and

         (ii)   Notifies the department that the recipient:

               (A) Is a fleeing felon as described in paragraph
(iii) of this subsection or has information necessary for the
requesting officer to conduct the officer's official duties; and

               (B) The location or apprehension of the
recipient is within the requesting officer's duties.

          (iii) For purposes of this section, a fleeing felon
is defined as an individual who:

               (A) Is fleeing to avoid prosecution, custody or
confinement after conviction, under the laws of the jurisdiction
from which the individual flees, for a crime or attempt to
commit a crime, which is a felony under the laws of the
jurisdiction from which the individual flees, or which, in the
case of the state of New Jersey, is a high misdemeanor, or is
violating a condition of probation or parole imposed under
federal or state law; and

               (B) Whose conduct as described in this
subsection has not been pardoned by the president of the United
States or the governor of the jurisdiction from which the felon
flees.

     (e) If the department learns of the location of a fleeing
felon or of an individual who has an outstanding warrant for his
arrest, the department shall notify the appropriate law
enforcement agency. The department shall limit disclosure under
this section by providing only the current address of the
recipient under the personal opportunities with employment
responsibilities (POWER) program.

     42-2-112. Misrepresentation; penalties; recovery,
termination or modification of assistance and services.

     (a) No person shall knowingly make a false statement or
misrepresentation, fail to disclose a material fact, aid, abet
or conspire with any other person in obtaining any form of
supplemental nutrition assistance benefit under the supplemental
nutrition assistance program.

     (b) No person shall knowingly make a false statement or
misrepresentation, fail to disclose a material fact, aid, abet
or conspire with any other person in obtaining any commodity
under the supplemental nutrition assistance program.

     (c) No person shall knowingly trade or otherwise dispose
of any supplemental nutrition assistance benefit received under
the supplemental nutrition assistance program, except to a
federally authorized food retailer.

     (d) No person shall knowingly sell any form of
supplemental nutrition assistance benefit to any other person.

     (e) No person shall knowingly give, sell, trade or
otherwise dispose of any commodity obtained under the
supplemental nutrition assistance program to any other person.

     (f) No person shall knowingly buy, trade or otherwise
obtain any form of supplemental nutrition assistance benefit
from any other person, except as authorized by law.
     (g) No person shall knowingly buy, trade or otherwise
obtain any commodity under the supplemental nutrition assistance
program from any other person, except as authorized by law.

     (h) No person shall knowingly make a false statement or
misrepresentation, knowingly fail to disclose a material fact,
aid, abet or conspire with any other person in obtaining public
welfare benefits.

     (j) No person shall knowingly directly or indirectly
deprive himself of any property, income or other resources in
order to qualify for public welfare benefits.

    (k)   Any person violating this section is guilty of:

          (i) A felony punishable by imprisonment for not more
than ten (10) years, a fine of not more than ten thousand
dollars ($10,000.00), or both, if the value of the commodity,
supplemental nutrition assistance benefit or other public
welfare benefit under this article is five hundred dollars
($500.00) or more; or

          (ii) A misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not
more than six (6) months, a fine of not more than seven hundred
fifty dollars ($750.00), or both, if the value of the commodity,
supplemental nutrition assistance benefit or other public
welfare benefit under this article is less than five hundred
dollars ($500.00).

     (m) In addition to the penalty imposed under subsection
(k) of this section, the amount of public welfare benefits
improperly provided due to any violation of this section may be
recovered by appropriate action which shall be instituted by the
department or by the attorney general on behalf of the
department.

     (n) The department shall disapprove, terminate or modify
the public welfare benefits to any applicant or recipient who
has been found guilty of violating this section until any court
sentence under this section is completed and full restitution is
made to the department. Public welfare benefits shall not be
denied to any minor because of violation of this section by a
parent or guardian.

     42-2-113. Assignment or transfer of assistance and
services; exemption from legal process.
     (a) Any assignment or transfer of public assistance and
social services provided under this article is void.

     (b) Except as authorized under W.S. 42-2-112(m), public
assistance and social services provided by this article are
exempt from levy, execution, attachment, garnishment or other
legal process or debt collection remedy. A waiver of exemptions
provided by this subsection is void.

    42-2-114.   Reimbursement of federal government.

The department shall reimburse the federal government as
required by federal law.

     42-2-115. Supplemental nutrition assistance program
eligibility recertification frequency. Note: this section is
effective as of 1/1/2027.

     (a) The department shall assign certification periods of
not greater than four (4) months to households that include an
able bodied adult without dependents and other households whose
circumstances are determined by the department to be unstable,
unless otherwise prohibited under federal law for the
supplemental nutrition assistance program.

     (b) The department shall assign certification periods of
one (1) or two (2) months to households that the department
determines will become ineligible for the supplemental nutrition
assistance program in the near future, unless otherwise
prohibited under federal law.

     (c) Except as provided by subsections (a) and (b) of this
section, the department shall assign certification periods of
not more than six (6) months to households whose members are not
elderly or disabled, unless otherwise prohibited under federal
law.

          ARTICLE 2 - EMPLOYMENT AND TRAINING PROGRAM

    42-2-201.   Definitions.

    (a)   As used in this article:

          (i) "Program" means the employment and training
program created under this article;
          (ii) "Support services" includes transportation,
child care and other services necessary to enable participants
in the program to participate without hardship to themselves or
their families.

     42-2-202. Participation required; exemptions;
disqualification of benefits.

     (a) If available within the county of his residence, any
person receiving benefits from the department under the
supplemental nutrition assistance or personal opportunities with
employment responsibilities (POWER) programs shall as a
condition of receiving any benefits, participate in the
employment and training program unless he:

         (i)    Is not physically able to work;

          (ii) Is determined to be unemployable by an
employment assessment conducted pursuant to department rule or
regulation; or

          (iii) Qualifies for a good cause exemption under rule
and regulation of the department.

     (b) Any person not exempt under this section and failing
to participate in the program as required under this article may
be disqualified from receiving benefits under the supplemental
nutrition assistance or personal opportunities with employment
responsibilities (POWER) programs. A good cause exemption may
be requested at any time by a benefit recipient.

     (c) Notwithstanding any other provisions of this title all
nonexempt recipients under the personal opportunities with
employment responsibilities (POWER) program in the state shall
be required to work or perform community service as defined by
rules and regulations of the department subject to coordination
with the United States department of health and human services
if required. Recipients may be exempted from the requirement
under this subsection if one (1) of the nonexempt recipients
within the assistance unit:

         (i)    Repealed By Laws 1997, ch. 196, § 2.

         (ii)   Repealed By Laws 1997, ch. 196, § 2.
          (iii) Except as provided in paragraph (c)(iv) of this
section, has a child who has not attained the age of three (3)
months;

          (iv) Gives birth to a child after ten (10) months as
a recipient under the personal opportunities with employment
responsibilities (POWER) program. The recipient under this
paragraph shall be exempted from the requirements under this
section for a period of three (3) months after the child is
born, unless the parent is a minor child in which case the
recipient shall be required to attend school in accordance with
paragraph (v) of this subsection;

          (v) Is a minor child who is required to attend school
pursuant to W.S. 21-4-102; or

          (vi)   For other good cause as determined by the
department.

     (d) Benefits and eligibility requirements under the
personal opportunities with employment responsibilities (POWER)
program shall be modified for assistance units under subsection
(c) of this section as follows:

          (i) Assistance units complying with subsection (c) of
this section shall receive full benefits to which they are
otherwise entitled under this title;

          (ii) In an assistance unit having a minor who has
completed the eighth grade or has attained sixteen (16) years of
age, but has not yet graduated from high school and refuses to
attend school or accept suitable employment if the parent will
not cooperate with the appropriate authorities as specified in a
plan approved by the department to resolve the problem, the
assistance unit shall not receive a performance payment for any
month the minor refuses to attend school or accept suitable
employment;

          (iii) Monthly earned income of a dependent full-time
student up to the age of eighteen (18), excluding minor parents,
shall not be included as income and resources in determining the
eligibility of the assistance unit for assistance and the amount
of assistance while the student is living in the residence of
his caretaker relative;

          (iv) In assistance units in which recipients not
otherwise exempted from the requirements of subsection (c) of
this section, the assistance unit shall not receive a
performance payment for any month the recipient fails to comply
with subsection (c) of this section and the recipient shall not
be eligible for medical assistance under chapter 4 of this title
until the recipient complies with the provisions of this
section;

          (v) Excluding allowance for personal motor vehicles
as specified under W.S. 42-2-109(b), the amount of assets an
assistance unit may own shall be not greater than five thousand
dollars ($5,000.00).

     42-2-203.   Establishment of program; powers and duties of
division.

    (a)   The department shall:

          (i) Establish an employment and training program
which shall include job registration and may include job search
employment training, work experience and support services;

          (ii) Establish the program in as many counties as is
feasible given funding limitations, cost effectiveness,
geography and unemployment in the county;

          (iii) Enter into cooperative agreements with other
agencies providing employment training and experience programs
to prevent duplication;

          (iv)   Repealed by Laws 2017, ch. 179, § 2.

          (v) Provide participants a copy of the rules and
regulations promulgated by the department for the program on
participation and for fair hearings.

     (b) The department may contract with public agencies and
private entities to implement this article. The department may
promulgate rules and regulations to implement this article.

            ARTICLE 3 - TELEPHONE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM

    42-2-301.    Repealed by Laws 2015, ch. 54, § 2.

    42-2-302.    Repealed by Laws 2015, ch. 54, § 2.

    42-2-303.    Repealed by Laws 2015, ch. 54, § 2.
                 ARTICLE 4 - MEDICAID ELIGIBILITY

    42-2-401.   Definitions.

    (a)   For purposes of this article:

          (i)   "Asset", with respect to an individual, means:

               (A) All income and resources of the individual
and of the individual's spouse, including any income or
resources to which the individual or his spouse is entitled but
does not receive because of action:

                     (I)   By the individual or his spouse;

                    (II) By a person, including a court or
administrative body, with legal authority to act in place of or
on behalf of the individual or his spouse; or

                    (III) By any person, including a court or
administrative body, acting at the direction or upon the request
of the individual or his spouse.

               (B) An annuity purchased by or on behalf of an
annuitant who has applied for medical assistance with respect to
long-term care services unless the annuity is an annuity as
described in 42 U.S.C. 1396p(c)(1)(G)(i) or (ii).

          (ii) "Income" means "income" as defined under 42
U.S.C. 1396p(h)(2);

          (iii) "Institutionalized individual" means an
individual who is an inpatient in a nursing facility, who is an
inpatient in a medical institution and with respect to whom
payment is made based on a level of care provided in a nursing
facility, or who is receiving home and community-based services;

          (iv) "Long-term care services" means nursing facility
services, a level of care in any institution equivalent to that
of nursing facility services, and home and community-based
services;

          (v) "Resources" means "resources" as defined under 42
U.S.C. 1396p(e)(5);

          (vi) "Department" means the department of health
unless otherwise specified.
     42-2-402. Transfers of assets affecting eligibility;
exceptions; disclosures by applicants.

     (a) If an institutionalized individual or the individual's
spouse has disposed of, for less than fair market value, any
asset or interest therein within sixty (60) months before or any
time after the first date the individual has both applied for
medical assistance and been institutionalized, the individual is
ineligible for medical assistance for long-term care services
for the period of time determined under subsection (b) of this
section.

     (b) For a transfer within the provisions of subsection (a)
of this section, the number of months of ineligibility for long-
term care services shall be the total, cumulative uncompensated
value of all assets transferred within the sixty (60) month
period, divided by the average monthly cost to a private patient
for nursing facility services on the date of application. The
period of ineligibility begins with the later of:

          (i) The first day of the first month in which the
assets were transferred and which does not occur in any other
period of ineligibility;

          (ii) The date on which the individual is eligible for
medical assistance under the state plan and would otherwise be
receiving institutional level care, but for the application of
the penalty period, and which does not occur during any other
period of ineligibility under this section.

     (c) In the case of a transfer by the spouse of an
individual which results in a period of ineligibility for
medical assistance under this section for the individual, the
department shall, using a reasonable methodology as specified by
the secretary of health and human services, apportion the period
of ineligibility for any portion of the period, among the
individual and the individual's spouse if the spouse otherwise
becomes eligible for medical assistance under chapter 4 of this
title.

     (d) An institutionalized individual is not rendered
ineligible for long-term care services due to a transfer within
the provisions of subsection (a) of this section if the asset
transferred was a home and:
          (i)   Title to the home was transferred to the
individual's:

                (A)   Spouse;

                (B)   Child who is under age twenty-one (21);

                (C)   Blind or disabled child as defined in 42
U.S.C. 1382c;

               (D) Sibling who has equity interest in the home
and who was residing in the home for a period of at least one
(1) year immediately before the date the individual became an
institutionalized individual; or

               (E) Child who was residing in the home for a
period of at least two (2) years immediately before the date the
individual became an institutionalized individual, and who
provided care to the individual which permitted the individual
to reside at home rather than in an institution or facility.

     (e) An institutionalized individual is not rendered
ineligible for long-term care services due to a transfer within
the provisions of subsection (a) of this section if the
department determines:

          (i) The individual intended to dispose of the asset
at fair market value or for other valuable consideration;

          (ii) The asset was transferred exclusively for a
purpose other than to qualify for medical assistance;

          (iii) That to the extent assets were transferred for
less than fair market value, that the assets or their fair
market equivalent have been returned to the individual; or

          (iv) To grant a waiver of the excess resources
created by the uncompensated transfer because denial of
eligibility would cause undue hardship for the individual, based
on criteria established by the secretary of health and human
services.

     (f) An institutionalized person who has made or whose
spouse has made a transfer within the provisions of subsection
(a) of this section is not ineligible for long-term care
services if the asset was transferred:
          (i) To the individual's spouse or to another
individual for the sole benefit of the individual's spouse;

          (ii) From the individual's spouse to another
individual for the sole benefit of the individual's spouse;

          (iii) To the individual's child who is blind or
disabled, as defined by 42 U.S.C. 1382c, or to a trust
established solely for the benefit of the child;

          (iv) To a trust established solely for the benefit of
an individual under sixty-five (65) years of age who is disabled
as defined by 42 U.S.C. 1382c(a)(3).

     (g) An applicant for long-term care services shall
disclose any interest the applicant, or the applicant's spouse
who is not residing in long-term care, has in an annuity or
similar financial instrument, regardless of whether the annuity
or instrument is irrevocable or is treated as an asset. For
purposes of subsection (a) of this section, the purchase of an
annuity shall be treated as the disposal of an asset for less
than fair market value unless:

          (i) The state is named as the remainder beneficiary
in the first position for at least the total amount of medical
assistance paid on behalf of the annuitant under this article;
or

          (ii) The state is named as the remainder beneficiary
in the second position after the spouse or minor or disabled
child and is named in the first position if the spouse or a
representative of the child disposes of any of the remainder for
less than fair market value.

     42-2-403. Trust transfers affecting eligibility for
medical assistance.

     (a) For purposes of determining an individual's
eligibility for or the amount of benefits under chapter 4 of
this title, the rules specified in subsections (d) and (e) of
this section shall apply to a trust established by the
individual.

     (b) For purposes of this section, a trust shall be
considered to have been established if an asset of an
individual, other than an asset transferred by will, was used to
form all or part of the corpus of the trust by any of the
following:

          (i)    The individual;

          (ii)   The individual's spouse;

          (iii) A person including a court or administrative
body, with legal authority to act in place of or on behalf of
the individual or the individual's spouse;

          (iv) A person including a court or administrative
body, acting at the direction or upon the request of the
individual or the individual's spouse.

     (c) In the case of a trust the corpus of which includes
assets of any other person, the provisions of this section shall
apply to the portion of the trust attributable to the assets of
the individual. This section shall apply without regard to:

          (i)    The purposes for which a trust is established;

          (ii) Whether the trustees may exercise any discretion
under the trust;

          (iii) Any restrictions on when or whether
distributions may be made from the trust; or

          (iv) Any restrictions on the use of distributions
from the trust.

    (d)   In the case of a revocable trust:

          (i) The corpus of the trust shall be considered
resources available to the individual;

          (ii) Payments from the trust to or for the benefit of
the individual shall be considered income of the individual; and

          (iii) Any other payments from the trust shall be
considered assets disposed of by the individual for purposes of
W.S. 42-2-402.

    (e)   In the case of an irrevocable trust:

          (i) If there are any circumstances under which
payment from the trust could be made to or for the benefit of
the individual, the portion of the corpus or corpus income from
which payments to the individual could be made shall be
considered resources available to the individual, and payments
from that portion of the corpus or income to or for the benefit
of the individual shall be considered income of the individual.
Payments from that portion of the corpus or income for any other
purpose shall be considered a transfer of assets by the
individual subject to W.S. 42-2-402; and

          (ii) Any portion of the trust or corpus income from
which no payment could under any circumstances be made to the
individual shall be considered, as of the date of establishment
of the trust or, if later, the date on which payment to the
individual was foreclosed, to be assets disposed by the
individual for purposes of W.S. 42-2-402. The value of the
trust shall be determined for purposes of W.S. 42-2-402 by
including the amount of any payments made from such portion of
the trust after the date specified in this paragraph.

     (f) Notwithstanding any other provision of this section,
this section shall not apply to any of the following trusts:

          (i) A trust containing the assets of an individual
under age sixty-five (65) who is disabled as defined by 42
U.S.C. 1382c(a)(3) and which is established for the benefit of
that individual by a parent, grandparent, legal guardian of the
individual or a court if the state will receive all amounts
remaining in the trust upon the death of the individual up to an
amount equal to the total medical assistance paid on behalf of
the individual under chapter 4 of this title;

          (ii)   A trust established for the benefit of an
individual if:

               (A) The trust is composed only of pension,
social security and other income to the individual and
accumulated income in the trust; and

               (B) The state will receive all amounts remaining
in the trust upon the death of the individual up to an amount
equal to the total medical assistance paid on behalf of the
individual under chapter 4 of this title.

          (iii) A trust containing the assets of an individual
who is disabled as defined in 42 U.S.C. 1382c(a)(3), that meets
the following conditions:
               (A) The trust is established and managed by a
nonprofit association;

               (B) A separate account is maintained for each
beneficiary of the trust but, for the purposes of investment and
management of funds, the trust pools the accounts;

               (C) Accounts in the trust are established solely
for the benefit of individuals who are disabled as defined by 42
U.S.C. 1382c(a)(3), by the parent, grandparent, legal guardian
of the disabled individual, by the disabled individual or by a
court; and

               (D) To the extent that amounts remaining in the
beneficiary's account upon the death of the beneficiary are not
retained by the trust, the trust pays to the state from the
remaining amounts in the account an amount equal to the total
amount of medical assistance paid on behalf of the beneficiary
under chapter 4 of this title.

     (g) The department shall establish procedures in
accordance with standards specified by the secretary of health
and human services under which the department waives the
application of this section for an individual if the individual
establishes that application would work an undue hardship on the
individual as determined on the basis of criteria established by
the secretary.

     (h) For purposes of this section, "trust" includes any
legal instrument or device that is similar to a trust but
includes an annuity only to the extent and in the manner as the
secretary of health and human resources specifies.

    42-2-404.   Determination of transfer of asset.

In the case of an asset held by an individual in common with
another person in a joint tenancy, tenancy in common or similar
arrangement, the asset, or the affected portion of the asset,
shall be considered to be transferred by the individual when any
action is taken, either by the individual or by any other
person, that reduces or eliminates the individual's ownership or
control of the asset.

     42-2-405. Individuals with substantial home equity;
disqualification.
     (a) An applicant shall not be eligible for long-term care
services under this article if the applicant's equity interest
in the applicant's home exceeds five hundred thousand dollars
($500,000.00).

     (b) Beginning on July 1, 2011 and annually thereafter, the
dollar amount in subsection (a) of this section shall be
adjusted based on the consumer price index for urban consumers
published by the United States department of labor, bureau of
labor statistics, for the preceding calendar year.

     (c) Subsection (a) of this section shall not apply to an
individual whose spouse, or child under age twenty-one (21), is
lawfully residing in the individual's home and is blind or
disabled as defined in 42 U.S.C. 1382c.

     (d) Nothing in this section shall be construed as
preventing an applicant from using a reverse mortgage or home
equity loan to reduce the applicant's total equity interest in
the applicant's home.

                  ARTICLE 5 - ENERGY ASSISTANCE

     42-2-501. Low income home energy assistance and
weatherization program; funding.

     (a) The department shall administer a low income home
energy assistance program in accordance with federal P.L. 97-35,
as amended. The department shall submit and keep current a
state plan and shall administer the program in accordance with
the state plan and this section.

     (b) The program shall provide energy assistance to
eligible households as provided in this section. Energy
assistance shall include those uses of federal funds authorized
under P.L. 97-35, as amended. To the extent permitted by
federal law the state plan shall provide that of the authorized
uses not less than twenty-five percent (25%) of the available
funding for the program shall be used for weatherization
assistance. Weatherization assistance shall include the
following for residential dwellings only:

         (i)   Weatherization needs assessments and audits;

          (ii) Caulking, insulation, storm window and similar
improvements to reduce energy use;
           (iii)   Furnace and heating system modifications and
repairs;

           (iv)    Furnace replacement;

           (v)    Repealed By Laws 2013, Ch. 183, § 1.

          (vi) Repair or replacement of water heaters and
heating systems for portions of a dwelling;

          (vii) Other measures as determined by the department
to be necessary to ensure a safe, well-weatherized dwelling.

     (c) In addition to categorically eligible individuals
authorized under P.L. 97-35, as amended, the state plan shall
provide eligibility for those households with incomes which do
not exceed the lesser of:

          (i) An amount equal to two hundred fifteen percent
(215%) of the federal poverty level for Wyoming; or

          (ii) An amount equal to sixty percent (60%) of the
state median household income.

    (d)    The department may modify the state plan as necessary:

          (i) To meet federal requirements not to exclude
households with lesser incomes than the amounts specified in
subsection (c) of this section; and

          (ii) To exclude households from receiving federal
funds if the household income limitation provided in this
section would violate federal restrictions.

     (e) The maximum assistance provided to any household under
the program in any state fiscal year shall not exceed the
federal department of energy maximum annual unit average as
calculated and authorized under P.L. 106-469, as amended.

     (f) The department may adopt rules and regulations as
necessary to implement this section.

   CHAPTER 3 - CHILD SUPPORT AND REVENUE ENHANCEMENT ACCOUNT

    42-3-101.      Creation; deposits.
     (a)   The child support and revenue enhancement account is
created.

     (b) The following payments, collections and revenues shall
be transmitted to the state treasurer for deposit to the credit
of the child support and revenue enhancement account:

          (i) Child support payments collected under the Child
Support Enforcement Act;

           (ii)   Fees collected pursuant to W.S. 20-6-105(b); and

          (iii) All funds collected under the overpayment and
fraud recovery program of the department.

     (c) For purposes of this chapter, "department" means the
department of family services created by W.S. 9-2-2006.

    42-3-102.     Administration.

The department shall administer the funds in the child support
and revenue enhancement account and report annually to the joint
appropriations interim committee and joint judiciary interim
committee. The account may be divided into subaccounts for
purposes of administrative management.

    42-3-103.     Authorized expenditures.

     (a) Funds in the child support and revenue enhancement
account shall be expended only as authorized by this section.

     (b) The department may at any time disburse funds in the
account for:

          (i) Payments to support obligees and disbursements
required under the guidelines of the federal child support
enforcement program;

          (ii) Authorized transfers of the federal share of
funds collected under the child support enforcement program and
the division's overpayment and fraud recovery program;

          (iii)   Incentive payments as provided by W.S.
20-6-106(j);

          (iv) Reimbursement to the department of health for
costs under Title XIX of the Social Security Act or may retain
funds to pay for the costs of foster care or minimum medical
program benefits; and

          (v) Reimbursement to service providers for the costs
of collection under the child support enforcement and
overpayment recovery programs.

     (c) Subject to legislative appropriation, the state's
share of funds in the account shall be expended for:

          (i) Administrative costs of the child support
enforcement program;

          (ii) Funding of benefits under the personal
opportunities with employment responsibilities (POWER) program;
and

          (iii)   Other administrative costs of the department.

     (d) Notwithstanding any other provision of this section,
if funds are recovered by the department under the overpayment
and fraud recovery program within the same biennial period
during which the funds were originally appropriated, the
department may expend those funds for the purposes for which
they were appropriated without further legislative
appropriation.

          CHAPTER 4 - MEDICAL ASSISTANCE AND SERVICES

                       ARTICLE 1 - IN GENERAL

    42-4-101.     Short title.

This chapter may be cited as the "Wyoming Medical Assistance and
Services Act". The program and services provided pursuant to
this chapter and Title XIX of the federal Social Security Act
may be cited as "Medicaid" or the "Medicaid program".

    42-4-102.     Definitions.

    (a)   As used in this chapter:

          (i) "Categorically eligible" means any individual in
need of medical assistance authorized by the legislature and by
Title XIX of the federal Social Security Act to be covered by a
state plan for medical assistance and services;
          (ii) "Medical assistance" means partial or full
payment of the reasonable charges assessed by any authorized
provider of the services and supplies enumerated under W.S.
42-4-103 and consistent with limitations and reimbursement
methodologies established by the department, which are provided
on behalf of a qualified recipient, excluding those services and
supplies provided by any relative of the recipient, unless the
relative is a family caregiver providing services through a
corporation or a limited liability company, which corporation or
limited liability company the relative may own, under a home and
community based waiver program, or for cosmetic purposes only;

          (iii) "Qualified" means any categorically eligible
individual satisfying eligibility criteria imposed by this
chapter, the state plan for medical assistance and services and
by rule and regulation of the department;

          (iv) "Relative" means any person as defined by
department rule and regulation;

          (v) "Resident" means any individual residing in this
state, including any individual temporarily absent from this
state;

          (vi) "Institutionalized spouse" means as defined by
the Medicare Catastrophic Coverage Act of 1988, P.L. 100-360;

          (vii)    "Department" means the state department of
health;

          (viii)    "Direct patient care personnel" means only:

              (A)     Certified nursing assistants;

              (B)     Licensed practical nurses;

              (C)     Registered nurses.

          (ix) "Skilled nursing home extraordinary care" means
skilled nursing home services clearly exceeding standard skilled
nursing home services and meeting the criteria established by
the department pursuant to W.S. 42-4-104(d);

          (x) "Intermediate care facility for people with
intellectual disability" means "intermediate care facility for
the mentally retarded" or "ICFMR" or "ICFs/MR" as those terms
are used in federal law and in other laws, rules and
regulations;

          (xi) "Family caregiver" means a relative of a waiver
recipient with a developmental disability or acquired brain
injury, who provides waiver services through a corporation or a
limited liability company, which corporation or limited
liability company the relative may own, to the person with a
developmental disability or acquired brain injury and who meets
the requirements for a qualified family caregiver as established
by rules promulgated by the department. Family caregivers shall
be certified by the department in the same manner as nonfamily
caregivers. For purposes of providing for reimbursement of
services to a family caregiver, the department shall amend the
state plan and apply for a waiver from the centers for Medicaid
and Medicare services, as necessary;

          (xii) "Intentional" means that a person, with respect
to information, intended to act in violation of the law;

          (xiii) "Knowing" or "knowingly" includes intentional
or intentionally and means that a person, with respect to
information, acts:

                (A)   With actual knowledge of the information;

               (B) In deliberate ignorance of the truth or
falsity of the information; or

               (C) In reckless disregard of the truth or
falsity of the information.

    42-4-103.    Authorized services and supplies.

     (a) Services and supplies authorized for medical
assistance under this chapter include:

         (i)    Inpatient hospital services;

         (ii)    Outpatient hospital services;

         (iii)   Laboratory and x-ray services;

         (iv)    Skilled nursing home services;
          (v) The professional services of a licensed and
certified physician, osteopathic physician or chiropractic
doctor;

         (vi)     Home health services;

         (vii)    Family planning services;

          (viii) Services provided by an authorized rural
health care clinic;

         (ix)     Midwife services provided by a:

               (A)     Certified nurse midwife licensed by the
board of nursing;

                (B)    Midwife licensed by the board of midwifery.

          (x) Early and periodic screening, diagnosis and
treatment for individuals who have not attained the age of
twenty-one (21) years in accordance with Title XIX of the
federal Social Security Act;

          (xi) Premiums, deductibles and coinsurance under
federal Medicare Part A, hospital insurance, and Part B,
supplemental medical insurance;

          (xii)   The professional services of a licensed
optometrist;

         (xiii)       Prescription drugs and oxygen;

          (xiv) Prosthetic devices which are necessary to
replace a missing portion of the body or assist in correcting a
dysfunctional portion of the body including training required to
implement the use of the device but excluding dental prostheses;

          (xv) Licensed rehabilitation center services and if
specifically prescribed by a licensed physician, outpatient
services of a privately operated licensed occupational, speech,
audiology or physical therapy center and the professional
services of a licensed occupational therapist, licensed speech
pathologist, licensed audiologist or a licensed physical
therapist;

          (xvi)   Services provided by an institution for mental
illnesses;
          (xvii) Services provided under a federal home and
community based waiver;

          (xviii) The professional services of a licensed
dentist which may be legally and alternatively performed by a
licensed physician or osteopathic physician and except as
provided under paragraph (a)(x) of this section, which are not
primarily provided for the care, treatment or replacement of
teeth or structures directly supporting teeth;

          (xix) Services provided by a freestanding ambulatory
surgical center;

          (xx) Services provided by a certified mental health
center or community substance abuse treatment center; mental
health services provided to qualified recipients by a licensed
physician or under the direction of a physician if an individual
treatment plan is established in writing, approved and
periodically reviewed by a licensed physician; services provided
by a licensed mental health professional. Authorized services
shall include services provided by a person holding a
provisional license as a mental health professional if the
services were provided under the supervision of a licensed
mental health professional. The department of health shall by
rule and regulation or within the state plan for medical
assistance and services, define those services qualifying as
mental health services under this paragraph and, pursuant to
W.S. 9-2-102, establish standards for certification under this
paragraph. As used in this paragraph "licensed mental health
professional" means a licensed professional counselor, a
licensed marriage and family therapist, a licensed addictions
therapist or a licensed clinical social worker;

          (xxi)     Services provided by intermediate care
facilities;

          (xxii) Services provided by an intermediate care
facility as defined under 42 U.S.C. § 1396d(d);

          (xxiii) Services provided by freestanding end stage
renal dialysis clinics or centers;

           (xxiv)    Services provided by advanced practitioners of
nursing;
          (xxv) Hospice care as defined in W.S. 35-2-
901(a)(xii) and authorized under 42 U.S.C. §
1396a(a)(10)(A)(ii)(VII) including hospice care in a hospice
facility for an eligible individual and room and board for
individuals receiving the care in a hospice facility.
Reimbursement rates for hospice care shall be set annually to
match Medicare hospice reimbursement rates. The room and board
reimbursement rate for hospice facilities shall not exceed one
hundred percent (100%) of the statewide average of the Medicaid
nursing home room and board rate when an eligible individual is
receiving hospice. For the purposes of this paragraph, "eligible
individual" means a person who is eligible for hospice care as
defined in the state Medicaid plan in effect on July 1, 2012;

          (xxvi) Tuberculosis ambulatory care authorized under
42 U.S.C. § 1396a(a)(10)(A)(ii)(XII);

          (xxvii) Targeted case management services, which
shall be services which will assist targeted individuals
eligible under the state plan in gaining access to needed
medical, social, educational and other services;

          (xxviii) Skilled nursing home extraordinary care in
accordance with W.S. 42-4-104(d);

            (xxix)    Bone marrow, kidney and liver transplant
services;

          (xxx)      Programs and services provided under the school
health program;

            (xxxi)    Services of a licensed dietitian;

          (xxxii) Air ambulance transport services, consistent
with W.S. 42-4-123;

          (xxxiii) Clubhouse rehabilitation services in
accordance with W.S. 42-4-124;

          (xxxiv)      The professional services of a school
psychologist;

            (xxxv)    The professional services of a school social
worker;

          (xxxvi) School based services delivered pursuant to
an individualized education program, including services:
                 (A)   Provided by an otherwise enrolled Medicaid
provider type;

               (B)     Provided by a licensed professional in a
school setting; or

               (C) Otherwise covered under this chapter to
support delivery of special education programs and services.

          (xxxvii)     The professional services of a licensed
pharmacist;

          (xxxviii) Podiatry services provided by a podiatrist
licensed by the board of registration in podiatry, if referred
to a podiatrist by a physician, physician assistant or an
advanced practice registered nurse;

          (xxxix) Services provided by birthing centers as
defined by W.S. 35-2-901(a)(iii).

     (b) In addition to other payments authorized under this
chapter, the department may provide payments to skilled nursing
homes which are providing services covered under this chapter
if:

          (i) The nursing home demonstrates that one hundred
percent (100%) of the additional amount received will be
expended upon direct patient care personnel salaries and
benefits; and

          (ii) The nursing home agrees to provide sufficient
data to the department substantiating compliance with paragraph
(i) of this subsection.

     (c) For purposes of implementing Medicaid reform pursuant
to 2013 Wyoming Session Laws, Chapter 117, the department may
apply for any applicable waivers or permissions to allow
exceptions to federal conflict free case management definitions
for frontier and rural areas, which to the extent consistent
with federal law, shall implement a system using a neutral third
party to ensure no conflicts exist. Consistent with federal law,
the department may phase in the independent case management
system. In negotiating a waiver pursuant to this subsection,
the department shall, to the extent practicable and approved by
the center for Medicare and Medicaid services:
          (i) Allow an individual or agency to provide case
management and direct services to discrete clients if the
services are provided under conflict free circumstances;

          (ii) When implementing updated case manager
educational standards, provide for a three (3) year transition
period and allow credit for prior case manager experience.

     42-4-104. Powers and duties of department of health; state
Medicaid agent appointed by governor.

    (a)   The department of health shall:

          (i)   Administer this chapter;

          (ii) Develop a state plan for medical assistance and
services provided to qualified recipients under this chapter and
otherwise providing for the effective administration of this
chapter;

          (iii) Maintain records on the administration of this
chapter, report to the federal government as required by federal
law and regulation and within limitations imposed under W.S.
42-4-112, may provide for the availability of information on the
administration of this chapter to interested persons;

          (iv) Adopt, amend and rescind rules and regulations
on the administration of this chapter following notice and
public hearing in accordance with the Wyoming Administrative
Procedure Act.

     (b) In carrying out subsection (a) of this section, the
department may:

          (i) Advise, consult and cooperate with any state
agency or political subdivision, any other state, the federal
government, private industry and other interested persons;

          (ii) Negotiate and enter into contract with other
public and private agencies and persons as necessary to
administer this chapter;

          (iii) Directly or by contract and through one (1) or
more fiscal intermediaries, provide payments to providers of
services and supplies for medical assistance authorized by this
chapter in the manner and amount provided by this chapter;
          (iv) Receive funds from any source for purposes of
carrying out this chapter;

          (v) Establish reasonable limits on services and
supplies authorized under W.S. 42-4-103;

          (vi)   Conduct pilot projects pursuant to W.S.
42-4-107(c);

          (vii) Provide for part or all of the services and
supplies authorized under W.S. 42-4-103 for some or all
categorically eligible individuals through health care insurance
or through contracts with networks of health care providers;

         (viii)    Purchase stop gap insurance;

          (ix) Enter into intergovernmental transfer
arrangements with qualifying facilities and providers, including
but not limited to hospitals, nursing homes, hospital owned and
operated professional service providers and ground ambulance
service providers, in which all federal funding received as a
result of the intergovernmental transfer arrangements shall be
distributed to participating facilities and providers in
accordance with the terms of an approved state plan amendment or
other agreement with the centers for Medicare and Medicaid
services. Notwithstanding, if consistent with the state plan
amendment or agreement, the department may use funds derived
from such intergovernmental transfers to pay administrative
expenses incurred by the department or its agent in performing
the activities authorized under this subsection, provided that
these expenses shall not exceed a total of three percent (3%) of
the aggregate intergovernmental transfer funds collected in the
fiscal year;

          (x) Provide for the withholding of medical assistance
payments from nursing care facilities in accordance with W.S.
42-8-107(b)(i).

     (c) Subject to limitations imposed under this subsection,
the department shall, at least once every five (5) years but not
more than once in any three (3) year period, establish a new
base period to be used in calculating all skilled nursing homes'
medical assistance per diem base rate reimbursable under this
chapter, using the most recent cost report information provided
to the department. For purposes of medical assistance
reimbursable under this chapter, the department shall reimburse
each eligible provider of skilled nursing home services the
greater of the following amounts:

          (i) Medical assistance computed on the per diem base
rate under the new base period established pursuant to this
subsection; or

          (ii) For the state fiscal year beginning July 1, 2003
and ending June 30, 2004, medical assistance computed on the per
diem base rate existing prior to the establishment of the new
base period under this subsection.

     (d) The department shall establish by rule the conditions
and requirements for skilled nursing home extraordinary care.
The requirements shall include, but are not limited to the
following:

          (i) The care shall be previously authorized by the
department for each individual and subject to continual audit by
the department;

          (ii) The cost for the care shall clearly exceed the
standard skilled nursing home per diem rate;

          (iii) The cost shall be excluded from the nursing
home's cost report to the department; and

          (iv) No extraordinary care payment shall be made for
equipment owned by the nursing home in providing the care.

     (e) The chief administrator of the Medicaid program
created pursuant to this chapter shall be the state Medicaid
agent within the department of health, who shall be appointed by
the governor, shall serve at the pleasure of the governor and
may be removed by the governor as provided by W.S. 9-1-202. The
state Medicaid agent shall oversee and coordinate all programs
which provide Medicaid services or determine Medicaid
eligibility pursuant to W.S. 42-4-106 and chapter 2 of this
title.

    42-4-105.   Repealed by Laws 1991, ch. 221, § 3.

     42-4-106. Application for assistance; determination of
eligibility; assignment of benefits; resources and income
allowances defined for institutionalized spouse.
     (a) Any Wyoming resident may apply for medical assistance
under this chapter by filing an application by telephone, by
mail, in person at the eligibility customer service center in
Cheyenne, on the eligibility internet site or at a department of
family services field office located in the county in which the
individual resides. A determination of eligibility for medical
assistance shall be based upon the application. Medical
assistance shall be provided on behalf of a qualified applicant
with reasonable promptness.

     (b) Upon signing an application for medical assistance
under this chapter, an applicant assigns to the department any
right to medical support or payment for medical expenses from
any other person on his behalf or on behalf of any relative for
whom application is made. The assignment is effective upon a
determination of eligibility. Application for medical
assistance shall contain an explanation of the assignment
provided under this subsection.

     (c) In determining the eligibility of an institutionalized
spouse for medical assistance under this chapter, the resources
of the noninstitutionalized spouse shall not be considered
available to the institutionalized spouse to the extent the
amount of his resources does not exceed the maximum authorized
by the Medicare Catastrophic Coverage Act of 1988, P.L. 100-360.
For purposes of determining the amount of an institutionalized
spouse's monthly income to be applied towards payment of
institutional care costs, the maximum amount of allowance
authorized by the Medicare Catastrophic Coverage Act of 1988,
P.L. 100-360 shall be deducted from his monthly income.

     (d) In any assistance program under this chapter for which
income is the criterion or one (1) of the criteria for
assistance payments, compensation received for a veteran's
service connected disability shall not be counted in determining
income if that compensation on an annual basis is not more than
the poverty level for the applicant as determined by the federal
office of management and budget.

     (e) The following requirements shall be met before an
applicant is eligible for medical assistance under this chapter:
[NOTE: This subsection will be effective 7/1/2027.]

          (i) An applicant shall be a citizen or national of
the United States and shall provide a valid social security
number and proof of identity. An applicant considered to be
lawfully present in the United States shall be eligible for
medical assistance under this chapter. The requirement in this
paragraph shall not apply when determining if the department of
health will cover children in the custody of the department of
family services;

          (ii) An applicant shall be a Wyoming resident or meet
the criteria specified in the Wyoming Medicaid state plan. An
applicant who intends to return to the applicant's home in
another state or country shall not be considered a Wyoming
resident;

          (iii) An applicant shall fulfill not less than one
(1) of the following criteria:

               (A) Be determined disabled according to social
security guidelines by the social security administration or the
department;

               (B) Be entitled to receive supplemental security
income or be eligible for supplemental security income-related
programs;

               (C) Be entitled to receive hospice services in
accordance with a voluntary election and a health care provider
statement of a terminal condition where:

                    (I) The applicant has received hospice
services or resided in a medical institution for not less than
thirty (30) consecutive days; or

                    (II) The applicant is not a supplemental
security income recipient and dies before completion of the time
requirement specified in subdivision (I) of this subparagraph.

               (D) Be qualified for services, pursuant to rules
of the department, under a Medicaid waiver or other expansion
that the legislature has authorized;

               (E) Be infected with tuberculosis and, if the
person is not a Wyoming resident or United States citizen, is
present in Wyoming and, if not treated, is a threat to infect
Wyoming residents with tuberculosis;

               (F) Be otherwise qualified for medical
assistance pursuant to federal Medicaid regulations or be
eligible under a mandatory requirement of the federal government
for participation in Medicaid, provided that no expansion
eligibility for Medicaid beyond the eligibility as of January 1,
2026 shall occur without prior authorization by the legislature,
except that the governor may authorize a temporary expansion in
eligibility needed to combat a public health emergency, provided
that the temporary expansion shall end not more than thirty (30)
days after the adjournment of the next legislative session;

               (G) Be a child in the custody of the department
of family services in foster care, basic foster care, noncitizen
foster care, subsidized adoption or in residence at the Wyoming
boys' school or the Wyoming girls' school;

               (H) Be enrolled in the 1115 family planning
waiver. The department of health is authorized to continue
operating the 1115 waiver until its planned expiration in
December 31, 2027 and is not authorized to renew the waiver
beyond this expiration date;

               (J) Be enrolled in the employed individuals with
disabilities program under section 1902(a)(10)(A)(ii)(XV) of the
federal Social Security Act;

               (K) Be enrolled in the breast and cervical
cancer treatment program under section 1902(a)(10)(A)(ii)(XVIII)
of the federal Social Security Act.

          (iv) An applicant shall fulfill any other criteria
required pursuant to rules of the department or federal Medicaid
regulations.

     42-4-107. Uniform application throughout state;
discrimination prohibited; pilot projects authorized.

     (a) This chapter and the state plan for medical assistance
and services developed under W.S. 42-4-104(a)(ii) shall be
uniformly applied within all political subdivisions of the
state.

     (b) The provision of medical assistance to any applicant
or qualified recipient shall not be denied or delayed and the
administration of this chapter shall not otherwise discriminate
against any applicant or recipient on the basis of race, creed,
color, national origin, sex or mental or physical handicap.

     (c) Notwithstanding any other provision of this act, the
department, in providing services and supplies authorized by
this act, may conduct pilot projects pertaining to some or all
categorically eligible individuals.

    42-4-108.   Administrative hearings.

In accordance with the Wyoming Administrative Procedure Act, the
department shall provide opportunity for a hearing to any
individual denied medical assistance under this chapter or
otherwise aggrieved by the administration of this chapter.

    42-4-109.   Renumbered and Repealed.

    (a)   Renumbered as 42-4-207(a) by Laws 1994, ch. 73, § 2.

    (b)   Renumbered as 42-4-207(b) by Laws 1994, ch. 73, § 2.

    (c)   Repealed by Laws 1994, ch. 73, § 3.

    (d)   Renumbered as 42-4-207(f) by Laws 1994, ch. 73, § 2.

    42-4-110.   Charges for inpatient hospital services.

A cost deduction, cost sharing or other similar charge shall not
be imposed upon any recipient of medical assistance for
inpatient hospital services provided on his behalf pursuant to
this chapter.

     42-4-111. Providing or obtaining assistance by
misrepresentation; penalties.

    (a)   Repealed by Laws 2019, ch. 96, § 3.

    (b)   Repealed by Laws 2019, ch. 96, § 3.

     (c) No person shall knowingly make a false statement or
misrepresentation or knowingly fail to disclose a material fact
in obtaining medical assistance under this chapter. A person
violating this subsection is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable
by imprisonment for not more than six (6) months, a fine of not
more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00), or both.

    (d)   Repealed by Laws 2019, ch. 96, § 3.

    (e)   Repealed by Laws 2019, ch. 96, § 3.

     42-4-112. Confidentiality of records; penalty for
disclosure; authorized disclosure.
     (a) Any application, information and record obtained,
compiled and maintained for an applicant or qualified recipient
of medical assistance under this chapter is confidential and
shall not be disclosed or used for any purpose other than the
administration of this chapter.

     (b) A violation of subsection (a) of this section is a
misdemeanor.

     (c) Notwithstanding subsection (a) of this section and any
other provision of law to the contrary, and for purposes of
ensuring any medical assistance under this act does not
duplicate any benefit payment made by another state agency,
insurer, group health plan, third party administrator, health
maintenance organization or similar entity, the department may
upon request of the state agency, insurer or similar entity,
disclose information limited to a recipient's name, social
security number, amount of payment, charge for services, date of
services and services rendered relating to medical assistance
payments made under this act. A state agency, insurer, group
health plan, health maintenance organization or similar entity
shall, upon request of the department, disclose the same limited
information to the department. Information received under this
subsection shall be used only for the purpose authorized by this
subsection and shall otherwise be confidential and the state
agency, insurer, group health plan, health maintenance
organization or other recipient entity shall be subject to the
confidentiality restrictions imposed by law upon information
received to the extent required of the department. Any
violation of this subsection is a misdemeanor punishable by
imprisonment for not more than six (6) months, a fine of not
more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00), or both.

     (d) Prior to receipt of any payment under this act, the
department shall require an applicant for or recipient of
assistance under this act to sign a waiver authorizing the
release of information limited to assistance payment information
to state agencies, insurers, group health plans, third party
administrators, health maintenance organizations or similar
entities for purposes specified by subsection (c) of this
section.

    42-4-113.   Eligibility criteria; irrevocable burial trusts.
     (a) The department shall not consider as assets available
to an applicant seeking medical assistance the corpus of a
Medicaid qualifying trust:

         (i)    That is irrevocable;

          (ii) In which the trustee and trustor retain no
discretion with respect to distributions to the applicant;

          (iii) In which the income from the trust shall be
transferred to the applicant at least annually;

          (iv) In which the trust corpus shall not exceed five
thousand dollars ($5,000.00); and

          (v) In which the trust corpus is specifically and
irrevocably designated, assigned, or pledged for payment of the
applicant's burial expenses.

     (b) If any of the trust corpus remains after payment of
burial expenses, that remainder shall be transferred to the
department to be used in the medical assistance program.

    42-4-114.   Cooperative agreements authorized.

The department may enter into a cooperative agreement and may
contract with private attorneys to provide legal services and
legal representation necessary to assist the department in
enforcing its right to reimbursement created under article 2 of
this chapter. The department and its contract attorneys shall
have an unconditional right to intervene in any action by or on
behalf of a recipient or former recipient against any third
party who may be legally liable to reimburse any medical
assistance provided under the Wyoming Medicaid program. If no
action has been brought, the department and its contract
attorneys may initiate and prosecute an independent action on
behalf of the department against any third party that may be
liable to the person to whom the care was furnished. If the
department elects not to contract with private attorneys to
provide legal services and representation under this section,
the attorney general, or an appropriate county attorney, shall
provide the legal services and representation.

     42-4-115. Work incentives improvement option; purchase of
services; eligibility criteria; definition.
     (a) The department may amend the state plan for medical
assistance and services developed under W.S. 42-4-104(a)(ii) to
allow individuals with countable income not to exceed three
hundred percent (300%) of the supplemental security income level
to receive services authorized under W.S. 42-4-103(a), provided
that:

         (i)    Repealed by Laws 2002, Ch. 31, § 2.

         (ii)   Repealed By Laws 2002, Ch. 31, § 2.

          (iii) The individual is eligible to buy into the
Wyoming Medical Assistance and Services Act under the federal
Ticket to Work and Work Incentive Improvement Act of 1999 and
subsequent similar federal enactments and the federal government
is not restricted from paying its proportionate share of the
individual's eligible medical expenses;

          (iv) Provided that the individual's earnings do not
exceed the level specified in section 201(a)(3) of the Federal
Ticket to Work and Work Incentive Improvement Act of 1999; and

          (v) The individual pays to the department a premium
of seven and one-half percent (7.5%) of his total gross earnings
from work and seven and one-half percent (7.5%) of his unearned
income in excess of six hundred dollars ($600.00) per year,
provided that:

               (A) The total paid in premiums under this
section does not exceed the yearly premium as calculated
pursuant to W.S. 42-4-116; and

               (B) The individual is not liable for more than
the full premium calculated pursuant to W.S. 42-4-116.

     (b) If the federal government does not allow a state plan
amendment containing the expense limitations provided in
paragraphs (a)(i) and (ii) of this section or provisions with
similar fiscal effects, the state plan amendment authorized by
this section shall not be implemented without specific
legislative authorization.

     (c) With respect to the premium received pursuant to
subsection (a) of this section, the department shall deduct and
forward to the federal government any amount owed under federal
regulations. Any overpaid premium shall be refunded to the
individual and the balance shall be deposited in the general
fund. The sum of all amounts deposited under this section shall
be reported in the biennial budget submissions to the joint
appropriations interim committee as premium earned to offset the
expenses of the program.

    (d)   Repealed by Laws 2015, ch. 54, § 2.

    (e)   Repealed by Laws 2002, Ch. 31, § 2.

    (f)   Repealed By Laws 2002, Ch. 31, § 2.

    42-4-116.    Premium calculation.

     (a) The calculation of premium for services under W.S.
42-4-115 shall be as follows:

          (i) Determine the total expenses of the Medicaid
program for the most recent state fiscal year and the total
number of clients in the Medicaid program served in that period;

          (ii) Deduct from the totals in paragraph (i) of this
subsection the clients over the age of sixty-five (65) years and
the expenses associated with those clients;

          (iii) Divide the resulting expenses calculated
pursuant to paragraph (ii) of this subsection by the clients
remaining after the deduction pursuant to paragraph (ii) of this
subsection. The result is the basic annual premium;

          (iv) Add to the basic premium a risk factor of fifty
percent (50%) of the basic premium to recover additional costs
incurred by the population eligible to be served pursuant to
W.S. 42-4-115; and

          (v) The premium shall be the sum of the basic annual
premium calculated pursuant to paragraph (iii) of this
subsection and the risk factor calculated pursuant to paragraph
(iv) of this subsection.

     42-4-117.   End stage renal dialysis program; rulemaking;
funding.

     (a) Effective July 1, 2001, the department shall expand
coverage for services authorized under W.S. 42-4-103(a)(xxiii)
for qualified individuals in need of end stage renal dialysis to
the extent funding is available.
     (b) The department shall by rule and regulation establish
reasonable limits on services and supplies authorized under this
section, including establishing eligibility criteria for receipt
of services. In establishing eligibility criteria, the
department shall consider financial ability of the individual or
his family to contribute to the services, severity of the
illness, the critical need for the services and the ability of
the program to meet the needs of the individual.

     42-4-118. Prescription drug assistance program created;
eligibility criteria; benefits provided; coverage of
medications.

     (a) There is created a prescription drug assistance
program to assist residents of the state. The program shall be a
state funded program to provide prescription drug assistance, in
addition to the services provided under the Wyoming Medical
Assistance and Services Act. Effective July 1, 2002, the
prescription drug assistance program shall replace the minimum
medical program. Eligibility for assistance under the program
created by this section shall not constitute an entitlement and
services shall be provided under this section only to the extent
funds are available.

     (b) Residents of the state may apply for the prescription
drug assistance program in the manner provided in W.S. 42-4-106.
Upon a determination of eligibility, the applicant remains
eligible for assistance under the prescription drug assistance
program as provided in this section. If a recipient ceases to be
a resident of the state, his eligibility under the program shall
terminate. The department shall by rule and regulation establish
income eligibility guidelines no later than July 1 of each year
based on the federal poverty levels in effect on January 1 of
that calendar year. Persons with family income of one hundred
percent (100%) of the federal poverty level or less shall be
eligible under this section. The rules shall take into
consideration family size up to four (4) individuals.
Eligibility for families consisting of more than four (4)
individuals shall be determined on the basis of the income of a
family of four (4) individuals. Persons eligible for
prescription drug assistance under other state or federal
programs, except the state high risk health insurance pool,
shall be ineligible for assistance under the prescription drug
assistance program.

     (c) Except as provided by this subsection, an eligibility
determination made under subsection (b) of this section shall be
valid for one (1) year. A recipient whose monthly income changes
by more than one-third (1/3), shall report the change in income
to the department. The recipient is entitled to a
redetermination if his income has declined and may, at the
option of the department, be subject to a redetermination if his
income has increased.

     (d) A recipient shall be required to pay a copayment per
prescription of ten dollars ($10.00) for generic drugs and
twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for brand name drugs.

     (e) The department shall project costs of the program
created by this section at least quarterly and compare those
projected costs against the funds appropriated for the program.
If the funds available to the program are insufficient to meet
the projected costs of the program, the department shall take
action to prevent the program from incurring costs beyond
available funds, including taking any of the following actions:

           (i)   Imposing a moratorium on new enrollments in the
program;

          (ii) Reducing the gross family income eligibility
level specified in subsection (b) of this section;

          (iii) Imposing higher prescription drug copayments
not to exceed twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per prescription;

          (iv) Eliminating specified drugs from eligibility
under the program;

          (v) Carrying claims for payment into the next
biennium if the amount of claims are less than one twenty-fourth
(1/24) of the appropriation that has been enacted for the next
biennium.

     42-4-119. Pharmacy plus program; eligibility criteria;
rulemaking; termination of program.

     (a) The department may apply for a demonstration waiver
under section 1115 of the federal Social Security Act to allow
individuals with income or assets in excess of limits generally
established in the state plan to receive services under a
pharmacy plus program provided that:
          (i) The individual is a beneficiary under the federal
Medicare program who has not been determined to be eligible for
full Medicaid benefits under the state plan;

          (ii) The total family income of the individual does
not exceed one hundred seventy-five percent (175%) of the
federal poverty level in effect on April 1 of that calendar
year;

          (iii) The total family net assets of the individual
do not exceed three hundred fifty thousand dollars
($350,000.00); and

          (iv) An individual determined eligible to receive
services under this section shall not be eligible for other
services under W.S. 42-4-103, unless the individual otherwise
qualifies for the services. Eligibility for assistance under the
program created by this section shall not constitute an
entitlement and services shall be provided under this section
only to the extent funds are available.

     (b) The department is directed to negotiate the terms and
conditions of the waiver with the United States secretary of
health and human services as necessary to implement this
section.

     (c) Upon approval of the final terms and conditions by the
United States secretary of health and human services and the
legislature of the waiver applied for under this section, the
department shall implement the pharmacy plus program to assist
eligible individuals with payment and management of prescription
drug costs. In implementing the pharmacy plus program, the
department may use private sector benefit management approaches,
including pharmacy benefit managers, preferred drug lists, prior
authorization, pharmacist consultation, provider education,
disease state management and variable enrollee cost sharing in
the form of annual or monthly premium assessments, per
prescription copayment requirements, coinsurance, deductibles
and coverage limits. The department shall establish through
rules and regulations variable enrollee cost sharing provisions
under this subsection on a graduated basis, taking into
consideration the differing income levels of enrollees and the
funding available to the program.

     (d) If the federal Medicare program is amended to provide
pharmaceutical benefits for recipients under that program, the
pharmacy plus program authorized under this section shall
terminate upon implementation of the federal Medicare
pharmaceutical benefits program.

     (e) The department shall project costs of the program
created by this section at least quarterly and compare those
projected costs against the funds appropriated for the program.
If the funds available to the program are insufficient to meet
the projected costs of the program, the department shall take
action to prevent the program from incurring costs beyond
available funds, including taking any of the actions specified
in W.S. 42-4-118(e).

     42-4-120. Contracts for waiver services; authority of
department; emergency case services; cost based payments;
training and certification of specialists.

     (a) The department is authorized to enter into contracts
with providers of services under a federal home and community
based waiver and to enforce the provisions of this section.

     (b) The department shall adopt and enforce reasonable
rules and regulations for the certification of home and
community based waiver services, and shall include minimum
certification standards for each category of service provider.

     (c) Before entering into a contract with a provider of
services under this section, the department shall ascertain that
the provider is in compliance with applicable regulations
regarding health care providers adopted pursuant to W.S.
35-2-908, with all applicable professional licensing statutes
and regulations and with regulations adopted pursuant to
subsection (b) of this section.

     (d) In addition to other remedies, in the event of a
chronic failure to provide services or services that fail to
meet the applicable standard of care for the profession involved
or a continuing condition creating serious detriment to the
health, safety or welfare of recipients of home and community
based waiver services, the department may impose a civil penalty
upon the provider. For each day of continuing violation, the
civil penalty shall not exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00)
or one percent (1%) of the amount paid to the provider during
the previous twelve (12) months, whichever is greater, and any
administrative penalty assessed under this section shall be paid
over to the state treasurer who shall remit the monies to the
county treasurer to the credit of the public school fund of the
county in which the violation occurred, except as otherwise
provided by federal law for Medicaid certified nursing
facilities.

     (e) The department shall have the same authority to place
conditions upon a provider, to impose a monitor or to revoke a
certification issued under this section in the manner described
in W.S. 35-2-905.

     (f) The department, not later than April 1, 2008, shall
promulgate rules under which an emergency case shall be
determined to exist with respect to eligibility for federal home
and community based waiver services for persons with
developmental disabilities or adult brain injury under this act.

     (g) The department shall establish by rule and regulation
a cost based reimbursement system to pay providers of services
and supplies under home and community based waiver programs for
persons with developmental disabilities or acquired brain
injury. The payment system shall:

          (i) Use information provided to the department,
including but not limited to:

              (A)   Provider cost data;

              (B)   Provider claims data;

              (C)   Participant needs assessment data;

              (D)   Other relevant regional and national data.

          (ii) Establish a new base period to be used in
calculating reimbursement rates to providers for fiscal year
2012 and at least once every four (4) years thereafter but not
more than once in any two (2) year period. When a new base
period is established, the department shall submit a biennial or
supplemental budget request to adjust provider reimbursement
rates based on the most current base period;

          (iii) Be developed following consultation with
Wyoming developmental disability and acquired brain injury
waiver program service providers, developmental disability
waiver program clients and their families and an expert in cost
based waiver program payment systems, which the department is
authorized to retain by contract following competitive bidding;
          (iv) Be implemented for services and supplies
provided under individual budget amounts established on and
after July 1, 2008;

          (v) Be contingent upon approval by the center for
Medicare and Medicaid services of the United States department
of health and human services;

          (vi) Require service and supply providers to provide
actual cost of service and supply data to the department and to
submit to reasonable audits of the submitted data, if requested
by the department.

     (h) The department shall apply to the center for Medicare
and Medicaid services of the United States department of health
and human services for authorization to reimburse at an enhanced
rate direct care providers who have training and certification
as behavioral specialists in the care of persons dually
diagnosed with a developmental disability and a mental illness.

     (j) The department, through the developmental disabilities
division and the mental health and substance abuse services
division, shall collaborate with the University of Wyoming
institute for disabilities and the community college commission
in developing a training program for behavioral specialists in
the care of persons dually diagnosed with a developmental
disability and a mental illness. The program shall provide for
timely testing and certification and shall include a required
curriculum and standards for certification and evaluation of
dual diagnosis behavioral specialists where certificants will
qualify for reimbursement under the requirements of subsection
(h) of this section.

     (k) Department budget requests for the cost based
reimbursement system established pursuant to subsection (g) of
this section shall be calculated to reflect all service units
required in plans of care for recipients as of the preceding
June 30.

     (m) The department shall ensure that state agencies
working with service providers receiving funds pursuant to this
section shall have established employment first policies,
including competitive employment in an integrated setting,
consistent with the requirements of W.S. 9-2-3207.

     (n) For purposes of this section, "military service
member" means any person serving in the uniformed services as
defined in W.S. 8-1-102(a)(xxii). Military service members shall
have the following benefits if they meet the qualifications
listed:

          (i) Active duty military service members who have
been assigned to serve in Wyoming may submit an application for
waiver services under this paragraph upon receiving military
orders to serve in Wyoming, provided that no qualifying
dependent shall receive services until the dependent is residing
in Wyoming;

          (ii) Active duty military service members retiring or
separating from active duty military service may submit an
application for waiver services under this paragraph upon
receiving retirement or separation orders, provided that:

               (A) The military member certifies on a form
provided by the department that he intends to reside in Wyoming
within eighteen (18) months after retiring or separating from
military service;

               (B) The military service member claimed Wyoming
as his primary state of residency for not less than two (2)
years prior to his military service as proved by documentation
required by the department;

               (C) The military service member claimed Wyoming
residency on his leave and earnings statements while serving in
the military; and

               (D) No covered services shall be received
pursuant to this paragraph unless and until the qualifying
dependent and the military service member are residing in
Wyoming within eighteen (18) months after the military service
member retires or separates from active military service.

          (iii) Military service members who qualified for and
received or were previously placed on the waiting list to
receive dependent waiver services under the home and community
based Medicaid waivers authorized by this section, and who left
the state for military reasons, shall upon their return to the
state for continued military service or upon military separation
or retirement be placed in a status identical to where they
would be if they had not left the state provided that:
               (A) The military service member claimed Wyoming
residency on his leave and earnings statements while serving in
the military; and

               (B) For retiring or separating military service
members, in no case shall covered services be received pursuant
to this paragraph unless and until the military service member
and the qualifying dependent are residing in Wyoming within
eighteen (18) months after the military service member retires
or separates from active military service.

     (o) Applicants who are qualifying military service members
under subsection (n) of this section may also be considered for
funding made available to any other applicant under this section
and shall receive services from whatever source of funding for
which they first qualify. In consultation with the Wyoming
military department, the department of health shall promulgate
rules and regulations regarding applications and qualifications
for waiver services authorized by subsection (n) of this
section.

    42-4-121.   Program of all-inclusive care for the elderly.

     (a) The department, as an optional services program of the
Medicaid program, may develop and implement a program of all-
inclusive care for the elderly (PACE) in accordance with section
4802 of the Balanced Budget Act of 1997, P.L. 105-33, as
amended, and 42 C.F.R. part 460.

     (b) The department may contract with approved PACE
organizations to provide, in the manner and to the extent
authorized by federal law, comprehensive, community based acute
and long term care services for older Medicaid eligible
participants who are at least fifty-five (55) years old, living
in a PACE service area, certified by the department as eligible
for long term care facility placement and who elect to
participate in the PACE program. Services provided through a
PACE organization shall include all necessary medical and
related care required by the PACE participant, including but not
limited to physician and other health care provider visits,
regular check ups, prescription drugs, rehabilitation services,
home and personal care services, medically necessary
transportation, hospitalization and skilled nursing facility
services.
     (c) The objective of the PACE program is to provide
prepaid, capitated, quality comprehensive health care services
that are designed to:

          (i) Enhance the quality of life and autonomy for
frail, older adults;

          (ii)   Maximize dignity of, and respect for, older
adults;

          (iii) Enable frail, older adults to live in the
community as long as medically and socially feasible;

          (iv)   Preserve and support the older adult's family
unit.

     (d) The department shall adopt rules as necessary to
implement this section. In adopting rules, the department
shall:

          (i) Provide application procedures for organizations
seeking to become a PACE program provider;

          (ii) Establish the capitation rate for Medicaid
participants electing to participate in the PACE program instead
of receiving Medicaid services on a fee for service basis. The
capitation rate shall be no less than ninety percent (90%) of
the fee for service equivalent cost, including the department's
cost of administration, that the department estimates would be
payable for all services covered under the PACE organization
contract if all of those services were to be provided on a fee
for service basis;

          (iii) Provide application procedures, including
acknowledgment of informed consent, for Medicaid participants
electing to participate in the PACE program in lieu of receiving
fee for service Medicaid benefits.

     (e) PACE provider organizations shall be public or private
organizations providing or having the capacity to provide, as
determined by the department, comprehensive health care services
on a risk based capitated basis to PACE patients.

     (f) To demonstrate capacity as required by subsection (e)
of this section, the department shall consider evidence such as
an organization's insurance, reinsurance, cash reserves, letters
of credit, guarantees of companies affiliated with the
organization or a combination of those arrangements.

     (g) PACE organizations shall assume responsibility for all
costs generated by PACE program participants, and shall create
and maintain a risk reserve fund that will cover any cost
overages for any participant. A PACE organization is
responsible for the full financial risk that the cost of
services required by a program participant might exceed the
Medicaid capitated fee for that participant.

     (h) The department shall develop and implement a
coordinated plan to promote the PACE program among prospective
Medicaid long term care patients in the service areas of
approved PACE organizations.

     (j) As soon as practicable after July 1, 2010, the
department shall submit to the federal centers for Medicare and
Medicaid services an amendment to the state Medicaid plan
authorizing the state to implement the program of all-inclusive
care for the elderly pursuant to this section. The department
shall not enter into a contract with any PACE provider
organization until all necessary state plan amendments or
waivers are approved. An additional amendment to the state
Medicaid plan shall not be required each time the department
enters into a contract with a new PACE provider organization.

     (k) Nothing in this section shall be construed to require
a PACE organization to hold a certificate of authority as an
insurer or a health maintenance organization under title 26 of
the Wyoming statutes.

    (m)   Repealed by Laws 2015, ch. 59, § 2.

     (n) No PACE organization shall withhold any necessary
medical or nonmedical services to any PACE participant in order
to increase the organization's profit from the Medicaid
capitated payment.

     (o) PACE participants may disenroll from the PACE program
at any time. A PACE organization shall promptly report the
identity of all disenrolled participants to the department.

    42-4-122.   Cooperation with paternity determination.

     (a) Except as otherwise provided in subsection (b) of this
section, as a condition of eligibility, or continuing
eligibility, for medical assistance under this chapter, a person
who receives medical assistance shall cooperate in good faith
with the department to:

          (i) Establish the paternity of a child, including any
proceeding to adjudicate parentage that is held pursuant to W.S.
14-2-801 through 14-2-823;

          (ii) Obtain a child support obligation payment or
other payments or property to which the state may have a claim,
including recovery of birth costs paid by medical assistance
pursuant to W.S. 14-2-1001 through 14-2-1008.

     (b) The following persons are not required to cooperate
with the department pursuant to subsection (a) of this section:

          (i) A person who is pregnant, or who has been
pregnant within the preceding sixty (60) days;

          (ii) A person who has good cause to not cooperate
with the department, as determined by rule promulgated pursuant
to W.S. 14-2-1008;

          (iii) A woman who has been pregnant within the
preceding twelve (12) months. This paragraph is repealed
effective March 31, 2027.

    42-4-123.   Repealed by Laws 2019, ch. 189, § 2.

    42-4-124.   Clubhouse rehabilitation services.

     (a) The director of the department shall include
reimbursement for clubhouse rehabilitation services within the
Medicaid program.

     (b) Within the limits of available funding, the department
may enter into contracts with certified clubhouse providers for
clubhouse rehabilitation services.

     (c) On or before September 1, 2019 the department shall
report to the joint labor, health and social services interim
committee on information, findings and recommendations related
to clubhouse rehabilitation services including information to
facilitate implementation of Medicaid contracts to be entered
into pursuant to this section.
     (d) As used in this section, "clubhouse" means a
community-based psychosocial rehabilitation program that:

          (i) Has members of the program, with staff
assistance, engaged in operating all aspects of the clubhouse,
including food service, clerical, reception, janitorial and
other member services such as employment training, housing
assistance and educational support; and

          (ii) Is designed to alleviate a member's emotional or
behavior problems with the goal of transitioning the member to a
less restrictive level of care, reintegrating the member into
the community and increasing social connectedness beyond a
clinical or employment setting.

             ARTICLE 2 - MEDICAID BENEFIT RECOVERY

    42-4-201.   Action against third party; notice; subrogation.

     (a) If a person who is or becomes an applicant or
recipient for medical assistance under this chapter receives an
injury under circumstances creating a legal liability in some
third party, the applicant or recipient shall not be deprived of
any medical assistance for which he is entitled under this
chapter. He may also pursue his remedy at law against the third
party. If the applicant or recipient recovers from the third
party in any manner, including judgment, compromise, settlement
or release, the state is entitled to be reimbursed for all
payments made, or to be made, on behalf of the applicant or
recipient under this chapter.

     (b) The department shall be served by certified mail,
return receipt requested, with a copy of the complaint within
seven (7) days of its filing in any suit initiated pursuant to
subsection (a) of this section. Any attorney who knowingly fails
to serve the complaint on the department shall be reported to
the state board of professional responsibility for the Wyoming
state bar. The department shall be notified in writing by
certified mail return receipt requested of any judgment,
compromise, settlement or release entered into by any person who
has been an applicant for or recipient of medical assistance
under this chapter after the date of injury. If there is a
settlement, compromise or release entered into by the parties
the attorney general representing the director shall be made a
party in all negotiations for settlement, compromise or release.
The department, for purposes of facilitating compromise and
settlement, may in a proper case authorize acceptance by the
state of less than the state's claim for reimbursement under
this section for all current and future assistance under this
chapter. Any reimbursement right created pursuant to this
article shall remain in effect until the state is paid the
amount authorized under this section. In addition the person
paying the settlement remains liable to the state's
reimbursement right unless the state through the attorney
general signs the release prior to payment of an agreed
settlement.

     (c) If the injury causes death of the recipient, the
rights and remedies in this section inure to, and the
obligations are binding upon the personal representative of the
deceased recipient for the benefit of his dependents.

    (d)   Repealed By Laws 2002, Ch. 39, § 2.

     (e) If, after notice is provided in accordance with this
section, the department states in writing that it will neither
file an independent action nor intervene in an existing action
as allowed by W.S. 42-4-114, the department's reimbursement
right shall be reduced by not more than thirty-three percent
(33%) for attorney's fees together with the amount of its
proportionate share of costs. If the department does not provide
this written statement, its right to reimbursement shall not be
reduced by any share of the recipient's attorney's fees or
costs.

     42-4-202.   Third party liability; authority; enforcement;
notice; costs.

     (a) When the department provides, pays for or becomes
liable for medical care, it shall have a lien for the cost of
the medical assistance provided upon any and all causes of
action which accrue to the person to whom the care was
furnished, or to the person's legal representatives, as a result
of the injuries which necessitated the medical care.

     (b) The department may perfect and enforce its lien by
following the procedures set forth in W.S. 29-1-312 and
29-1-313, and its verified lien statement shall be filed with
the appropriate clerk in the county of financial responsibility.
The verified lien statement shall contain the following:

          (i) The name and address of the person to whom
medical care was furnished;
         (ii)   The date of injury;

          (iii) The name and address of the vendor or vendors
furnishing medical care;

         (iv)   The dates of the service;

         (v)    The amount claimed to be due for the care;

          (vi) To the best of the department's knowledge, the
names and addresses of all persons, firms or corporations
claimed to be liable for damages arising from injuries.

     (c) This section shall not affect the priority of any
attorney's lien. The department shall not be subject to any
limitations period referred to in title 1 or 29 of the Wyoming
statutes to file its verified lien statement.

     (d) The department shall be given notice of monetary
claims against a person, firm or corporation that may be liable
to pay part or all of the cost of medical care when the
department has paid or become liable for the cost of that care.
Notice shall be given as follows:

          (i) Applicants for medical assistance shall notify
the state or local agency of any possible claims when they
submit the application. Recipients of medical assistance shall
notify the department of any possible claims when those claims
arise. A recipient's noncooperation in providing information to
the department to assist in pursuing liable third parties shall
result in denial or termination of eligibility per federal law;

          (ii) An enrolled medicaid provider shall notify the
department when the person has reason to believe that a third
party may be liable for payment of the cost of medical care. If
the person providing medical care services fails to notify the
department when a third party is liable for payment of the cost
of medical care and the department, because of lack of notice
from the provider, does not receive reimbursement for the cost
of medical care, the department may adjust the value of those
claims from future payments to that provider;

          (iii) An attorney representing an applicant for or a
recipient of medical assistance in a claim upon which the
department may have a reimbursement right under this chapter
shall notify the department of its potential claim for
reimbursement before filing a claim, commencing an action, or
negotiating a settlement. Any attorney who fails to notify the
department of any settlement or fails to ensure the state is
reimbursed, to the extent of its reimbursement right, from the
proceeds of any settlement or judgment under this section shall
be reported to the state board of professional responsibility
for the Wyoming state bar. If the attorney knowingly failed to
report and insure reimbursement to the state, the department
shall have a claim for relief against the attorney for the
amount of the reimbursement right under this chapter;

          (iv) Insurers shall not disburse any settlement
payment for a personal injury claim made to a recipient of
medical assistance under this act until seven (7) working days
after the department has received written notice from the
insurer of the proposed settlement or judgment and failed to
provide a written objection to the insurer. Failure to provide
notice under this paragraph shall commence the tolling of any
applicable statute of limitations.

     (e) Notice given to the local agency is not sufficient to
meet the requirements of paragraphs (d)(ii) through (iv) of this
section.

    (f)   Repealed By Laws 1999, ch. 125, § 2.

     42-4-203. Settlement between recipient and tortfeasor or
insurer; lien not discharged; exceptions.

     (a) No settlement made by and between the applicant or
recipient and the tortfeasor or insurer shall discharge the
right to reimbursement created pursuant to this article, against
any money due or owing by such tortfeasor or insurer to the
applicant or recipient or relieve the tortfeasor or insurer from
liability by reason of the right to reimbursement unless the
settlement also provides for the payment and discharge of the
right to reimbursement and the attorney general has signed a
written release as provided by W.S. 42-4-201(b).

          (i)    Repealed By Laws 2002, Ch. 39, § 2.

          (ii)   Repealed By Laws 2002, Ch. 39, § 2.

     42-4-204. Department subrogated to right of recovery of
applicant or recipient; utilization of personal health
insurance; insurance coverage of recipients.
     (a) The department shall be subrogated to any right of
recovery or indemnification arising from an accident or
occurrence resulting in expenditures by the department, which an
applicant or recipient of medical assistance or any legally
liable party has against an insurer, health insurer, self-
insured plan, group health plan, service benefit plan, managed
care organization, pharmacy benefit manager or other party that
is, by statute, contract or agreement, legally responsible for
payment of a claim for health care items or services, including
but not limited to hospitalization, pharmaceutical services,
physician services, nursing services and other medical services,
not to exceed the amount expended by the department for the care
and treatment of the applicant or recipient. An applicant or
recipient or legally liable party, by the act of applying for,
or recipient receiving medical assistance, shall be deemed to
have made a subrogation assignment and an assignment of claim
for benefits to the department. The department shall inform an
applicant of the assignments at the time of application. In
addition, any entitlements from a contractual agreement with an
applicant or recipient or legally liable party, a state or
federal program or a claim or action against any responsible
third party for medical services, not to exceed the amount
expended by the department, shall be so assigned. The
entitlements shall be directly reimbursable to the department by
third party payors. The department may assign its right to
subrogation or its entitlement to benefits to a designee or a
health care provider participating in the medicaid program and
providing services to an applicant or recipient, in order to
assist the provider in obtaining payment for the services. A
provider that has received an assignment from the department
shall notify the insurer of the assignment upon rendering of
services to the applicant or recipient. Failure to so notify
the insurer shall render the provider ineligible for payment
from the department. Once the insurer has been billed or
notified the provider may not request payment through the
medicaid program until a payment, denial or other explanation of
benefits, not including mistakes in billing, is received from
the insurer. The provider shall notify the department of any
request by the applicant or recipient or his legally liable
party or representative for billing information.

     (b) When a recipient of medical assistance has access to
personal health insurance through his employer, payment or part
payment of the premium for the insurance may be made by the
department when deemed appropriate by the director of the
department.
     (c) No individual accident policy, group accident policy,
health policy, accident and health policy, medical expense
policy or medical service plan contract, delivered, issued for
delivery or renewed in this state on or after July 1, 1995, and
no self-insured plan, managed care policy or plan, pharmacy
benefit management plan or policy or other policy or plan issued
by any other party that is, by statute, contract or agreement
legally responsible for payment of a claim for items or
services, delivered, issued for delivery or renewed in this
state on or after July 1, 2007, shall contain any provision
denying or limiting insurance benefits because services are
rendered to an insured who is eligible for or who received
medical assistance under this chapter. This section shall
supersede any statutory provision to the contrary. No such
policy, plan or contract, when enrolling an individual, shall
take into account the individual's eligibility for medical
assistance under this chapter. This subsection applies to all
such policies, plans and contracts issued by any person
including, but not limited to:

         (i)    An insurer;

          (ii) A group health plan as defined in section 607(1)
of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974;

          (iii) A managed care organization, pharmacy benefit
manager or other party that is, by statute, contract or
agreement, legally responsible for payment of a claim for a
health care item or service;

         (iv)   An entity offering a service benefit plan;

         (v)    A self-insured plan.

     (d) Medicaid shall not pay for any services provided under
this chapter if the individual eligible for medical assistance
has coverage for the services under an accident or health
insurance policy or other source.

     (e) In addition to the separate requirements set forth in
W.S. 42-4-205, all health insurers, including all self-insured
plans, group health plans as defined in section 607(1) of the
Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974, service benefit
plans, managed care organizations, pharmacy benefit managers, or
other parties that are, by statute, contract, or agreement,
legally responsible for payment of a claim for a health care
item or service, shall agree, as a condition of doing business
in the state of Wyoming, to:

          (i) Provide, with respect to the individuals who are
eligible for or are provided medical assistance by the
department of health, information to determine the period during
which the individual or the individuals' spouses or dependents
may be or may have been covered by a health insurer and the
nature of the coverage provided, including the name and address
of the insurer and identifying number of the plan, in a manner
prescribed by the secretary;

          (ii) Accept the state's right of recovery and the
assignment to the state of any right of an individual or other
entity to payment from another party for an item or service for
which payment has been made under the state plan;

          (iii) Respond within sixty (60) days to any inquiry
by the state regarding a claim for payment for any health care
item or service that is submitted not later than three (3) years
after the date of the provision of such health care item or
service; and

          (iv) Agree not to deny a claim submitted by the state
solely on the basis of the date of submission of the claim, the
type or format of the claim form, a failure to obtain required
prior authorization or a failure to present proper documentation
at the point of sale that is the basis of the claim, if:

               (A) The claim is submitted by the state within
the three (3) year period beginning on the date on which the
item or service was furnished; and

               (B) Any action by the state to enforce its
rights with respect to the claim is commenced within six (6)
years of the state's submission of the claim.

     42-4-205.   Insurance policy termination notification
requirement.

     (a) With respect to cases for which there is an assignment
in effect pursuant to W.S. 42-4-204:

          (i) The department, upon receipt of the health
coverage information, shall notify the obligor's insuring entity
that the department shall be notified thirty (30) days prior to
discontinuance of coverage;
          (ii) Entities providing health insurance as defined
in title 26 and health maintenance organizations and prepaid
health clinics as defined in W.S. 26-34-102 shall upon request
by the department, provide a list of insureds residing in the
state and any records and information as necessary to accomplish
the purpose of this section, unless the requirement results in
an unreasonable burden;

          (iii) The department and the insurance commissioner
appointed pursuant to W.S. 26-2-102 shall enter into a
cooperative agreement for requesting and obtaining information
necessary to effect the purpose and objectives of this section;

          (iv) The department shall only request information
from the entity providing health insurance necessary to
determine whether health insurance, as defined pursuant to title
26 or those health services provided pursuant to W.S. 26-34-102,
are discontinued;

          (v) The department, in consultation with the
department of insurance, shall promulgate rules for the
development and administration of the cooperative agreement.
The rules shall include the following:

               (A) A method for identifying those entities
subject to furnishing information under the cooperative
agreement;

               (B)   A method for furnishing requested
information; and

               (C) Procedures for requesting exemption from the
cooperative agreement based on an unreasonable burden to the
reporting entity.

          (vi) If the department notifies the insurer that it
has made payments to the provider, payment of benefits or
notices of denial issued by the insurer shall be made directly
to the department.

     (b) Upon the department receiving notice from the
obligor's insuring entity that the coverage is discontinued due
to cancellation for any reasons, the department shall retain
that information for use in enforcing any court order requiring
the obligor to provide health insurance to the individuals
stated in the court order.
    42-4-206.   Claims against estates.

     (a) If an individual receives any medical assistance
pursuant to this chapter, upon the individual's death, if
single, or upon the death of the survivor of a married couple,
either of whom received medical assistance, the total amount
paid for medical assistance rendered for the individual or the
spouse shall be filed by the department of health as a claim
against the estate of the individual or the estate of the
surviving spouse in the court having jurisdiction to probate the
estate. A claim shall be filed if medical assistance was
rendered for either person under one (1) of the following
circumstances:

          (i) The person was fifty-five (55) years of age or
older when he received medical assistance; or

          (ii) The person was an inpatient in a nursing
facility, intermediate care facility for people with
intellectual disability or other medical institution when he
received medical assistance.

     (b) The claim shall be considered an expense of the last
illness of the decedent. Any statute of limitations which
attempts to limit the department of health to recover for
medical assistance provided pursuant to this chapter shall not
apply to any claim made under this section for reimbursement for
the medical assistance.

     (c) The claim shall include only the total amount of
medical assistance rendered after the individual attains fifty-
five (55) years of age or during a period of
institutionalization as described in paragraph (a)(ii) of this
section, and shall not include interest. A claim for medical
assistance rendered for the predeceased spouse, against the
estate of a surviving spouse who did not receive medical
assistance, is limited to the value of the assets of the estate
that were marital property or jointly owned property at any time
during the marriage.

     (d) If a decedent who was single, or who was the surviving
spouse of a married couple, is survived by a child who has not
attained twenty-one (21) years of age or is blind or permanently
and totally disabled as defined by 42 U.S.C. § 1382c, no claim
shall be filed against the estate.
    (e)   Repealed By Laws 2002, Ch. 39, § 2.

     (f) The department of health shall establish procedures,
in accordance with standards specified by the secretary of
health and human services, under which the department of health
shall waive the application of this section if application would
work an undue hardship on the basis of criteria established by
the secretary.

    (g)   As used in this section:

          (i) "Asset" means as defined under W.S.
42-2-401(a)(i);

          (ii) "Estate" shall include all real and personal
property and other assets included within the individual's
estate, as defined for purposes of this state's probate law, and
includes any other real and personal property and other assets
in which the individual had any legal title or interest at the
time of death to the extent of that interest, including such
assets conveyed to a survivor, heir or assign of the deceased
individual through joint tenancy, tenancy in common,
survivorship, life estate, living trust or other arrangement.

     42-4-207. Recovery of incorrect payments; recovery of
correct payments; liens.

     (a) The department may through appropriate action recover
any incorrect payment of medical assistance under this chapter
on behalf of a recipient and may adjust any subsequent payment
by an amount equal to the incorrect payment. Any recovery shall
be prorated to the federal government in proportion to the
amount it contributed for medical assistance rendered.

     (b) In addition to subsection (a) of this section and
subject to a court order for recovery, the department may file a
lien upon all real and personal property of the recipient for
the incorrect payment of medical assistance on his behalf.

     (c) The department may file a pre-death lien upon real
property of an individual for medical assistance correctly paid
under this chapter to an individual:

          (i) Who is an inpatient in a nursing facility,
intermediate care facility for people with intellectual
disability, or other medical institution; and
          (ii) With respect to whom the department determines,
after notice and opportunity for a hearing, cannot reasonably be
expected to be discharged from the medical institution and to
return home.

     (d) No lien may be imposed under subsection (c) of this
section on an individual's home if any of the following persons
are lawfully residing in the home:

         (i)   The spouse of the individual;

          (ii) The individual's child who is under age
twenty-one (21), or is blind or disabled as defined in 42 U.S.C.
1382c; or

          (iii) A sibling of the individual, who has an equity
interest in the home and who was residing in the home for a
period of at least one (1) year immediately before the date of
the individual's admission to the medical institution.

     (e) No lien imposed under subsection (c) of this section
shall be subject to recovery if any of the following persons are
lawfully residing in the home on a continuous basis since the
date of the individual's admission to the facility or
institution:

          (i) A sibling of the individual who was residing in
the individual's home for a period of at least one (1) year
immediately before the date of the individual's admission to the
facility or institution;

          (ii) A child of the individual who was residing in
the individual's home for a period of at least two (2) years
immediately before the date of the individual's admission to the
facility or institution, and who establishes by a preponderance
of the evidence that he provided care to the individual which
permitted the individual to reside at home rather than in a
facility or institution.

     (f) Any lien imposed with respect to an individual
pursuant to subsection (c) of this section shall dissolve upon
that individual's discharge from the medical institution and
return home.

     (g) Nothing in this section shall require an applicant for
medical assistance under this chapter to enter into agreement
for a lien upon his real and personal property for the payment
of medical assistance on his behalf.

     (h) Upon sale of the property on which a lien has been
imposed pursuant to subsection (c) or (j) of this section, the
department shall seek recovery of the amount stated in its lien.
Transfers of real or personal property on or after the look-back
dates defined in 42 U.S.C. § 1396p by recipients of medical
assistance under this chapter, or their spouses, without
adequate consideration are voidable and may be set aside by an
action in district court.

     (j) The department may file a lien against the property of
any estate, as defined in W.S. 42-4-206(g), of a deceased
recipient for the amount of medical assistance provided while
the recipient was fifty-five (55) years of age or older or while
the recipient was an inpatient in a nursing facility,
intermediate care facility for people with intellectual
disability or other medical institution. The department shall
perfect this lien by filing a notice in the county in which the
real property exists. The department may file an amended lien
prior to the entry of the final order closing the estate.

     (k) The department may file a lien upon real property
pursuant to W.S. 2-18-103(g) upon the death of the grantor. The
department may file such lien regardless of whether the grantee
applied for a certificate of clearance pursuant to W.S.
2-18-103(n) or filed an affidavit to establish the death of the
grantor pursuant to W.S. 34-11-101.

    42-4-208.   Recovery for cost of health care.

     (a) The department, to the extent necessary to reimburse
its costs, shall be entitled to recover from any parent who:

          (i) Is required by court or administrative order to
provide coverage of the cost of health services to a child
eligible for medical assistance under this act; and

          (ii) Has received payment from a third party for the
costs of such services but has not used the payments to
reimburse either the other parent or guardian of the child or
the provider of the services.

     (b) The department shall be entitled to enforce any
judgment entered pursuant to this section by garnishment or any
other available statutory remedy.
     (c) Claims for current and past due child support shall
take priority over claims made under this section.

                    ARTICLE 3 - FALSE MEDICAID CLAIMS

    42-4-301.       Short title.

This act shall be known and may be cited as the "Wyoming
Medicaid False Claims Act."

    42-4-302.       Definitions.

    (a)     As used in this act:

          (i) "Claim" means any request or demand under the
Medicaid program, whether under a contract or otherwise, for
money, property or services that:

               (A) Is presented to an officer, employee or
agent of the state or a political subdivision of the state; or

               (B) Is made to a contractor, grantee or other
recipient, if the money or property is to be spent or used on
the state's behalf or to advance a state program or interest,
and if the state provides or has provided any portion of the
money or property requested or demanded.

          (ii) "Material statement" means a statement that
affects the payment or receipt of money or property;

            (iii)   "This act" means W.S. 42-4-301 through
42-4-306.

     42-4-303. Acts subjecting person to treble damages; costs
and civil penalties; exceptions.

     (a) Except as provided in subsection (c) of this section,
any person who commits any of the following acts in relation to
the Wyoming Medicaid program shall be liable to the state for
three (3) times the amount of damages which the state sustains
because of the act of that person. A person who commits any of
the following acts shall also be liable to the state for the
costs of a civil action brought to recover any penalties or
damages provided in this subsection, and shall be liable to the
state for a civil penalty of not less than one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) and not more than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00)
for each violation:

          (i) Knowingly presents or causes to be presented a
false or fraudulent claim for payment or approval;

          (ii) Knowingly makes, uses or causes to be made or
used, a false record or statement material to a false or
fraudulent claim;

          (iii) Is a beneficiary of an inadvertent submission
of a false claim to any employee, officer or agent of the state
or a political subdivision of the state, or to any contractor,
grantee or other recipient of state funds or funds of any
political subdivision of the state, who subsequently discovers
the falsity of the claim and fails to disclose the false claim
and make satisfactory arrangements for repayment to the state or
affected political subdivision within ninety (90) days after
discovery of the false claim;

          (iv) Conspires to commit a violation of paragraph
(i), (ii) or (iii) of this subsection.

     (b) Notwithstanding subsection (a) of this section, the
court may assess not more than two (2) times the amount of
damages which the state sustains because of the act in violation
of subsection (a) of this section, and no civil penalty, if the
court finds all of the following:

          (i) The person committing the violation furnished
officials of the state who are responsible for investigating
false claims violations with all information known to that
person about the violation within forty-five (45) days after the
information is requested; and

          (ii) The person has substantially cooperated with any
investigation by the state.

     (c) The provisions of subsections (a) and (b) of this
section shall not apply to a recipient as defined by W.S.
42-1-101(a)(v). Any recipient who knowingly:

          (i) Presents or causes to be presented a false or
fraudulent claim shall be liable to the state for the amount of
damages which the state sustains because of the claim and shall
be liable for a civil penalty of not more than one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00);
          (ii) Violates paragraph (i) of this subsection a
second or subsequent time shall be liable to the state for three
(3) times the amount of damages which the state sustains because
of the claim and shall be liable for a civil penalty of not more
than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00).

     42-4-304. Investigations and prosecutions; powers of
prosecuting authority; remedies for retaliation; venue; no
private right of action.

     (a) The Medicaid fraud control unit created by W.S. 42-4-
403 or a district attorney may investigate alleged violations of
W.S. 42-4-303(a) and (c). If the Medicaid fraud control unit or
district attorney finds that a person has violated or is
violating W.S. 42-4-303(a) or (c), the unit or district attorney
may bring a civil action under this section against that person.

     (b) Any employee, contractor or agent of a person being
investigated for a violation of W.S. 42-4-303(a) shall be
entitled to recover all economic damages suffered if that
employee, contractor or agent is discharged, demoted, suspended,
threatened, harassed or in any other manner retaliated against
in the terms and conditions of employment because of lawful acts
taken in good faith by the employee or others in an action
reported, filed or investigated under this act. An action by an
employee, contractor or agent under this subsection shall not be
brought more than three (3) years after the date when the
retaliation occurred. A person may bring an action in the
appropriate district court for the relief provided in this
subsection. This subsection shall not otherwise be construed to
create a private cause of action for violations of this act and
is limited to the remedies expressly created by this subsection
related to employment retaliation.

     (c) Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section,
any action under this act may be brought in the district court
of any county in which the defendant, or any of them, resides.
If the defendant is not a resident of the state of Wyoming, the
action shall be brought in the first judicial district court in
Laramie County.

     (d) Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section,
nothing in this act shall be construed to create a private cause
of action.
     (e) The remedies provided in this act are separate from
and additional to any remedies available under the State
Government Fraud Reduction Act.

     42-4-305.   Limitation of actions; retroactivity; burden of
proof.

     (a) A civil action under W.S. 42-4-304(a) shall not be
brought more than six (6) years after the date on which the
violation was committed or more than three (3) years after the
date when facts material to the right of action are known or
reasonably should have been known by the official of the state
charged with responsibility to act in the circumstances,
whichever occurs last, provided that in no event shall a civil
action be brought more than seven (7) years after the date on
which the violation is committed.

     (b) In any action brought under W.S. 42-4-304(a), the
state shall be required to prove all essential elements of the
cause of action, including damages, by clear and convincing
evidence.

     (c) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, a guilty
verdict rendered in a criminal proceeding charging false
statements or fraud is admissible in any civil action which
involves the same transaction as in the criminal proceeding and
which is brought under W.S. 42-4-304.

     42-4-306. Remedies under other laws; liberality of
construction; joint and several liability.

     (a) The provisions of this act are not exclusive, and the
remedies provided for in this act shall be in addition to any
other remedies provided for in any other law or available under
common law.

     (b) Liability pursuant to this act is joint and several
for any violation done by two (2) or more persons.

                 ARTICLE 4 - MEDICAID FRAUD CONTROL

    42-4-401.    Short title.

This act may be cited as the "Wyoming Medicaid Fraud Control
Act".

    42-4-402.    Definitions.
    (a)   As used in this act:

          (i)   "Claim" means as defined in W.S. 42-4-302(a)(i);

          (ii) "Provider" means a person who furnishes services
or supplies for which payment is claimed under Medicaid;

          (iii) "Record" means information in physical or
electronic form relating to:

                (A)   The treatment or care of any patient;

                (B)   A service or supply provided to a Medicaid
recipient;

                (C)   Rates paid for a service or supply;

               (D) Any other information required to be kept by
rule of the Medicaid program.

          (iv) "Unit" means the Medicaid fraud control unit
created by this act to investigate and prosecute fraud, waste,
abuse, bribery, kickback and related cases under Medicaid;

          (v)   "This act" means W.S. 42-4-401 through 42-4-412.

    42-4-403.   Medicaid fraud control unit created; duties.

     (a) The Medicaid fraud control unit is recognized and
continued in existence within the office of the attorney
general. The unit shall conduct a statewide program for
investigating and prosecuting violations of all applicable state
laws pertaining to fraud in the administration of the Medicaid
program and the provision of services or supplies, or the
activities of providers of services or supplies, under the state
Medicaid plan. The unit may also conduct criminal investigations
and prosecutions relating to patient abuse, neglect,
exploitation and other violations of law, if the violation is
primarily connected to Medicaid.

     (b) The office of the attorney general shall employ
attorneys, auditors, agents and other personnel which are
necessary to carry out the duties specified in this act in an
effective and efficient manner. Agents employed under this
subsection shall have the qualifications and powers of an agent
under W.S. 9-1-611(b)(i).
     (c) The unit may file criminal charges without
consultation with another person or entity outside the office of
the attorney general. Before the filing of criminal charges
under this act, the unit may consult with the district attorney
of the judicial district in which the prosecution would take
place. If the district attorney, after consultation, concurs
with the decision to file criminal charges, the unit may refer
the case to the district attorney. A district attorney may
request that the unit assign an attorney to assist with
prosecution under this act.

    42-4-404.   Access to records.

     (a) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the unit
shall have full access to all records held by a provider or by
another person or entity acting on the provider's behalf, if the
unit determines that such information is material to its duties
under this act. A provider, or another person or entity acting
on the provider's behalf, shall promptly comply with a request
from the unit for access to records.

     (b) The unit shall avoid disclosure of personally
identifiable information concerning any patient received in the
course of an investigation, except as authorized by this
section. The unit may transmit personally identifiable
information to authorized persons, consistent with federal law,
including governmental entities responsible for oversight of the
health care system, benefit programs or the regulation of health
care facilities or health care providers. The unit may also
disclose information under this section as otherwise permitted
or required by law.

     (c) No provider or other person or entity holding records
required to be made available to the unit under this section may
refuse to provide access on the basis that release would violate
any right of privacy, privilege against disclosure or use or any
other grounds for nondisclosure.

     (d) Nothing in this section shall be interpreted to limit
the authority of the unit to use other legal processes to
conduct investigations and prosecutions authorized by this act
or other provisions of law.

    42-4-405.   Reporting to unit.
The department of health, department of family services, health
care licensing boards, state agencies and the agents,
contractors and subcontractors of these entities shall refer to
the unit all cases where reasonable cause likely exists that
fraud, waste, abuse, bribery or kickbacks relating to Medicaid
has occurred, is occurring or will occur, as well as suspected
cases of patient abuse, neglect or exploitation under Medicaid.

    42-4-406.   Fraud and false statements; criminal penalty.

     (a) In relation to the delivery of or payment for services
or supplies under Medicaid, a person shall not knowingly, in
whole or in part:

         (i)    Make or cause to be made a false or fraudulent
claim;

         (ii)   Deliberately conceal a material fact;

          (iii) Make or cause to be made a false statement or
misrepresentation which will be used by another person;

         (iv)   Execute a scheme or artifice to commit fraud.

     (b) A person who violates subsection (a) of this section
is guilty of:

          (i) A misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment of not
more than six (6) months, a fine of not more than seven hundred
fifty dollars ($750.00), or both, if the amount of the claims
for services or supplies under Medicaid is less than one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00); or

          (ii) A felony punishable by imprisonment for not more
than ten (10) years, a fine of not more than ten thousand
dollars ($10,000.00), or both, if the amount of the claims for
services or supplies under Medicaid is one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) or more.

     (c) The department of health shall ensure that the
following documents contain a statement, under penalty of
perjury and signed by the responsible provider, that all matters
stated therein are true and accurate:

         (i)    An application to become a Medicaid provider;
          (ii) All reports stating income or expenses upon
which rates of payment by the department of health may be based;
and

          (iii) Each invoice for payment of a service or supply
provided to a person eligible for Medicaid.

     (d) A person commits perjury if the person signs or
submits, or causes to be signed or submitted a statement under
subsection (c) of this section, knowing that the application,
report or invoice contains information that is false, in whole
or in part. Perjury under this subsection shall be punished as
specified in W.S. 6-5-301(b).

     42-4-407. Kickbacks, bribes, undisclosed payments,
referral fees and illegal copayments; criminal penalty;
exception.

    (a)   A person shall not knowingly, in whole or in part:

          (i) Act on behalf of a provider to purchase or lease
a service or supply for which payment may be made, in whole or
in part, under Medicaid and then solicit or accept anything of
additional value in connection with the purchase or lease;

          (ii) Sell or lease to a provider a service or supply
for which payment may be made, in whole or in part, under
Medicaid, and offer, transfer or pay anything of additional
value in connection with the sale or lease;

          (iii) Refer an individual to a provider for the
provision of a service or supply for which payment may be made,
in whole or in part, under Medicaid, and solicit or accept
anything of value in connection with the referral;

          (iv) Act on behalf of a provider to charge, solicit,
accept or receive anything of value in addition to the amount
payable for a service or supply under Medicaid.

     (b) A violation of subsection (a) of this section is a
felony punishable by imprisonment of not more than five (5)
years, a fine of not more than ten thousand dollars
($10,000.00), or both.

     (c) A person does not commit a violation of paragraph
(a)(i) or (ii) of this section in cases where the additional
value transferred is a refund or discount made in the ordinary
course of business and is reflected by the records of the person
within a reasonable period of time after the transfer of value.

     42-4-408. Failure to maintain records; destruction of
records; penalty.

     (a) A person, after submitting a claim or receiving a
payment for a service or supply under Medicaid, shall not
knowingly fail to maintain records required under Medicaid,
including records that fully disclose the nature of the services
or supplies provided to a recipient.

     (b) A person who violates subsection (a) of this section
is guilty of:

          (i) A misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not
more than thirty (30) days, a fine of not more than seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00), or both, if:

               (A) The claims for which records were not
maintained are less than twenty-five percent (25%) of the
Medicaid claims submitted by the provider in any consecutive
three (3) month period; and

               (B) The amount of the claims for which records
were not maintained is five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) or
more.

          (ii) A misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not
more than six (6) months, a fine of not more than one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00), or both, if:

               (A) The claims for which records were not
maintained are twenty-five percent (25%) or more of the Medicaid
claims submitted by the provider in any consecutive three (3)
month period; and

               (B) The amount of the claims for which records
were not maintained is five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) or
more.

          (iii) A felony punishable by imprisonment for not
more than five (5) years, a fine of not more than ten thousand
dollars ($10,000.00), or both, if:

               (A) The person intended to defraud Medicaid and
the claims for which records were not maintained are twenty-five
percent (25%) or more of the Medicaid claims submitted by the
provider in any consecutive three (3) month period; and

               (B) The amount of the claims for which records
were not maintained is five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) or
more.

    42-4-409.   Aggregation of claims in certain cases.

The amount of claims relating to violations of this act through
a common scheme, or based on the same transaction or occurrence,
may be aggregated to determine the level of penalty under this
act, whether or not the claims were made as part of the same
claim under Medicaid.

    42-4-410.   Suspension or exclusion as provider.

     (a) The department of health or the department of family
services may suspend or exclude a provider from providing
services and supplies under Medicaid if:

          (i) The department determines that the provider has
committed an offense under this act or the Wyoming Medicaid
False Claims Act, whether or not a criminal prosecution is
brought under this act or any civil action is brought under the
Wyoming Medicaid False Claims Act; or

          (ii) A provider fails to provide the unit with access
to records pursuant to W.S. 42-4-404(a).

     (b) Any term of suspension or exclusion under this
section, which may be permanent, shall be determined by the
department of health or the department of family services.

     (c) The department of health and the department of family
services may adopt rules necessary to implement this section.

    42-4-411.   Provisions of act not exclusive remedies.

The provisions of this act shall not be exclusive and do not
preclude the use of any other criminal or civil remedy as
authorized by law.

    42-4-412.   Rules.
The attorney general, in consultation with the department of
health, may adopt rules to implement W.S. 42-4-401 through 42-4-
409 and 42-4-411.

         CHAPTER 5 - FAMILY PLANNING AND BIRTH CONTROL

     42-5-101.   Provision of information and services; refusal
to accept.

     (a) The department of health may provide and pay for
family planning and birth control information and services
including interviews with trained personnel, distribution of
literature, referral to a licensed physician for consultation,
examination, tests, medical treatment and prescription and to
the extent prescribed, the distribution of rhythm charts,
drugs, medical preparation, contraceptive devices and similar
products, to any person who may benefit from this information
and these services. Information and services shall be provided
in a language understood by the recipient.

     (b) Any medical service shall be performed by a licensed
physician.

     (c) The right to receive public assistance and social
services or any other public benefit shall not be affected by a
refusal to accept family planning and birth control services.
Each person offered family planning and birth control services
shall be advised of this subsection both orally and in writing.

     (d) Any person may refuse to accept the duty of offering
family planning and birth control services to the extent the
duty is contrary to his personal or religious beliefs. The
refusal shall not be grounds for:

         (i)     Any disciplinary action;

         (ii)    Dismissal;

         (iii)    Any departmental transfer;

         (iv)    Any other discrimination in employment;

         (v)     Suspension from employment; or

         (vi)    Any loss in pay or other benefits.

    42-5-102.    Statutory interpretation.
    (a)   Nothing in    W.S. 42-5-101 shall be interpreted to:

          (i)    Interfere with a person's religious beliefs;

          (ii) In any way abridge the right to accept or refuse
family planning and birth control services;

          (iii)   Impose practices offensive to a person's moral
standards; or

          (iv)    Restrict self-determination in the procreation
of children.

           CHAPTER 6 - LONG TERM CARE CHOICES PROGRAM

    42-6-101.     Short title.

This act shall be known and may be cited as the "Wyoming Long
Term Care Choices Act".

    42-6-102.     Definitions.

    (a)   As used in this act:

          (i) "Adult foster care" means care in a home licensed
as an adult foster home and care provided to a resident of the
home while temporarily away from the adult foster home;

          (ii) "Adult foster care home" means any family home
or facility in which residential care is provided in a homelike
environment for five (5) or fewer adults who are not related to
the provider by blood, marriage or adoption, except in special
circumstances. "Adult foster care home" does not include any
residential facility otherwise licensed or funded by the state
of Wyoming. The homes shall be regulated in accordance with W.S.
35-2-901 through 35-2-913 and this act which shall govern in
case of conflict;

          (iii) "Alternative eldercare home" means a facility
and program which:

               (A) Provides services and care at the highest
level required by a resident and as permitted under the
applicable facility;
               (B) Shall be licensed as a health care facility
pursuant to W.S. 35-2-901 through 35-2-913;

               (C) Creates communities that allow long-term
residents to develop lasting relationships with other residents
and staff;

               (D)   Maintains residences as units independent
from each other;

               (E) Provides, at a minimum, a private bedroom
and bathroom for each resident;

               (F) Provides services to Medicaid supported
residents at the Medicaid reimbursement rates;

               (G) Maintains all common spaces within the
house, including secured exterior space, accessible and open to
all residents during waking hours;

               (H)   Provides an office space for a nurse within
each house;

               (J) Provides a common area in each house
including a seating area;

               (K)   Provides public and staff bathroom
facilities;

               (M) Creates a residential home environment in
all aspects, using residential materials and designs appropriate
to the style of the community;

               (N)   Is committed to a restraint free
environment;

               (O) Implements a culture of learning and
participation by the residents and honors the elder hood stage
of life.

          (iv) "Assisted living facility" means as defined in
W.S. 35-2-901(a)(xxii);

         (v)   "Department" means the department of health;

          (vi) "Home medical testing" means medical testing
designed to be done in the home of the person being tested by a
person who is not a licensed health care professional and
includes but is not limited to testing done using a home blood
pressure monitor or a home diabetes management blood sugar
monitor;

          (vii) "Long term care assessment" means a form and an
assessment process conforming with relevant federal regulations
and designed to measure the abilities and disabilities of a
person in the activities of daily living to determine the
person's need for long term care. As of January 1, 2007 the
department of health form LT-101 entitled "Assessment of Medical
Necessity for Long Term Care" and the assessment needed to
complete it shall be the long term care assessment;

          (viii) "Medicaid" means the program administered by
the state pursuant to the Wyoming Medical Assistance and
Services Act and this act and partly funded by the federal
government pursuant to Title XIX of the federal Social Security
Act;

          (ix) "Nursing home" means a nursing care facility as
defined in W.S. 35-2-901(a)(xvi) and licensed pursuant to
Wyoming Statutes, article 9, chapter 2, title 35;

          (x) "Residential care" means the provision of room
and board and services that assist the resident in activities of
daily living including but not limited to bathing, dressing,
grooming, eating, medication management, incontinence care, home
medical testing, money management or recreation;

         (xi)    "This act" means W.S. 42-6-101 through 42-6-109.

    42-6-103.    Rulemaking; guidance.

The department is authorized to promulgate rules and regulations
to implement this act. The rules and regulations shall seek to
implement the objectives of this act by expanding the long term
care system to one emphasizing consumer choice and home, home
like and community based care alternatives.

     42-6-104.   Alternative long term care home pilot programs
authorized.

     (a) Three (3) pilot program grants are authorized to study
the feasibility of innovation in long term care facilities.
Eligible recipients shall include cities, counties and any
entity planning for long term care needs or providing long term
care including private nonprofit and private for profit
entities. The department shall solicit proposals for the grants
through a request for proposals developed in consultation with
the advisory council on aging. The department, in consultation
with the council, shall select the recipients from the proposals
received. The department shall negotiate any specific
provisions of the grant award needed and shall administer the
grants. In selecting the recipients, the council shall:

          (i) Consider the extent to which the proposal moves
the staff of the facility to a more patient centered culture;

          (ii) Consider one (1) project to reconfigure an
existing nursing home to achieve a resident-centered cultural
change;

          (iii) Fund one (1) study relating to the creation of
an alternative eldercare home, as defined in W.S.
42-6-102(a)(iii), provided that an acceptable project proposal
is received in response to the request for proposals;

          (iv) Fund one (1) study relating to the creation of
an alternative eldercare home, as defined in W.S.
42-6-102(a)(iii), which shall require that the home:

               (A) Maintains residences as units independent
from other facilities such that there is no physical connection
or shared roof structures between houses;

               (B) Provides a secured exterior patio or garden
with covered seating for each house accessible by all residents
including those with wheelchairs and assistive devices;

               (C) Provides for locked storage of hazardous
materials and control of kitchen access during high traffic
periods of meal preparation and clean-up;

               (D) Provides a den in each house to accommodate
television viewing and limited overnight guests;

               (E) Implements a self-managed work team approach
to in-house and clinical support staffing. Each house shall
have its own core in-house staffing that is specific and
dedicated to a single house;
               (F) Uses a home base facility for the clinical
support team members that is outside and separate from the
house; and

               (G) Maintains a lift free environment by
providing ceiling lifts in each resident's bedroom and bathroom.

          (v) Consider the extent to which there is a market
for the proposed facility or the extent to which people in need
of long term care are likely to choose the proposed facility;
and

          (vi) Consider the extent to which the proposed pilot
project will determine the effectiveness of its approach to
elder care in a timely manner.

     (b) Each grant proposal shall include plans for a local or
applicant match of twenty-five percent (25%) of the grant
amount.

     (c) For applicants that have completed any appropriate
needs study or market study, the grant funding may be used for
design and development of the facility and the organization
which will operate it. If this is done, the grant recipient
shall agree to accept Medicaid clients in the facility without
discrimination.

     (d) The department is directed to work with grant
recipients in the development of rules and regulations which are
compatible with the culture of the homes and which will assure
appropriate licensure for the care provided and the needs of the
elder residents. The department shall inform the joint labor,
health and social services interim committee if legislation is
needed to authorize any necessary rules and regulations.

     (e) As a condition of receiving the grants, each grantee
shall agree to provide training and reports to other parties in
the state interested in innovative long term care approaches.

     42-6-105.   Adult foster care homes; licensure; suspension
or revocation.

     (a) The department may initiate and license an adult
foster care pilot project subject to the following:
          (i) The applicant shall pay a one-time fee of one
hundred dollars ($100.00) which shall be deposited in the
general fund;

          (ii) The department, a public health nurse or other
employee of a local department of health shall complete an
inspection of the proposed adult foster care home;

          (iii) The proposed home shall comply with all state
and local building, sanitation, utility, fire and zoning codes
applicable to single family dwellings;

         (iv)   Repealed by Laws 2015, ch. 176, § 2.

         (v)    Repealed by Laws 2015, ch. 176, § 2.

          (vi) The pilot program shall consist of no more than
ten (10) adult foster care homes. At least three (3) of the
homes shall be in counties with a population of thirty thousand
(30,000) or less.

     (b) The department may, after notice and opportunity for
hearing, revoke or suspend any license issued pursuant to this
section, may prohibit a facility from accepting new resident
clients, may place conditions on the continuation of a license,
or may require a facility to take specified remedial actions
within a specified time, if:

          (i) There is a threat to the health, safety or
welfare of any resident client;

          (ii) There is credible evidence of abuse, neglect or
exploitation of any resident client;

          (iii) The facility is not operated in compliance with
this act or any rules and regulations promulgated pursuant to
this act.

     (c) If, in the professional judgment of the state health
officer, there is a clear and present threat to the health or
safety of a resident client, the state health officer may close
an adult foster care home and transfer the residents to another
place. The department shall also initiate proceedings pursuant
to subsection (b) of this section within three (3) working days.

     (d) The department shall complete a criminal records check
on any individual employed by adult foster care homes and on any
individual, other than a resident client or a resident client's
spouse, who at the time of licensure is expected to live in the
adult foster care home or who, after licensure, lives or comes
to live in the adult foster care home. The department may
refuse to license a facility or prohibit the individual from
living in the facility if he has been convicted of a felony
indicating he may abuse a resident or steal from a resident.

     (e) The department shall promulgate rules and regulations
consistent with this act to govern the pilot project.

    (f)   Repealed by Laws 2015, ch. 59, § 2.

     42-6-106. Home and community based waiver program
expanded; requirements.

    (a)   Repealed By Laws 2013, Ch. 117, § 2.

     (b) The department is authorized to increase the provider
reimbursement levels by an amount up to three dollars ($3.00)
per hour for hourly services or seventeen and six-tenths percent
(17.6%) above the prevailing rate for nonhourly services as of
December 1, 2006. The department shall report to the joint
labor, health and social services interim committee by November
1, 2007 the extent to which reimbursement improvements and any
other changes made have improved the availability of home health
care services and any additional remedies that may be needed.
The length of the report shall not exceed one thousand (1,000)
words plus any appropriate charts and graphs. Additional
reports may be made from time to time as the need arises.

     (c) The department shall set goals for expanding the
number of Medicaid home and community based clients in self
directed budget options and shall report progress toward those
goals to the joint labor, health and social services interim
committee no later than November 1, 2007, November 1, 2008 and
November 1, 2009. The department shall allow these options to
be managed by persons designated to do so in advanced health
care directives.

     (d) Consistent with approved budgets, the department shall
make available a pool of state funds to meet transitional needs
of clients moving from a more restrictive to a less restrictive
environment in circumstances where Medicaid funds are not
available due to federal restrictions. If sufficient funds are
available, these state funds may also be used to meet short term
needs of clients seeking to avoid placements in more restrictive
environments. The department shall govern the expenditure of
these funds though contracts, policies and rules and regulations
as needed.

     42-6-107.   Assisted living expansion; reimbursement
increase.

The department shall seek federal approval to increase the
number of allowed slots in the assisted living Medicaid waiver
from one hundred forty-six (146) to one hundred sixty-eight
(168) slots.

    42-6-108.    Adult day care.

The department shall investigate adult day care providers in
Wyoming with respect to access, rates, administration of rules
and regulations and their impact on providers and clients, and
shall report its findings to the joint labor, health and social
services interim committee and to the advisory council on aging.
The report shall not exceed two thousand (2,000) words in length
plus appropriate charts and graphs.

    42-6-109.    Aging and disability resource centers.

     (a) The department is authorized, using competitive grants
and contracts, to fund a statewide network of aging and
disability resource centers.

     (b) Locations of the aging and disability resource centers
shall be determined by the department of health, aging division.
In selecting locations for aging and disability resource
centers, the department of health, aging division, shall require
a degree of local community funding, which may include in kind
contributions, for a center.

     (c) The purpose of each center shall be to create a
single, coordinated system of information and assistance for all
persons seeking long term support. Each center shall assist
eligible persons in making informed decisions about health care
access and long term care service and support options and shall
serve as a referral agency to the long term care support system.
Centers shall provide information and assistance to individuals
needing either public or private resources, professionals
seeking assistance on behalf of their clients and individuals
planning for their future long term care needs.

    (d)   Repealed by Laws 2015, ch. 59, § 2.
          CHAPTER 7 - LONG-TERM CARE PARTNERSHIP PROGRAM

    42-7-101.     Short title.

This act may be cited as the "Wyoming Long-Term Care Partnership
Program Act.

    42-7-102.     Definitions.

    (a)   As used in this act:

          (i)   "Agency" means the department of health;

          (ii) "Asset disregard" means, with respect to
qualification for state Medicaid benefits, the disregard of any
assets or resources in an amount equal to the insurance benefit
payments that are made to or on behalf of an individual who is a
beneficiary under a qualified long-term care insurance
partnership policy;

          (iii)   "Department" means the department of insurance;

          (iv) "Medicaid" means the program administered by the
state pursuant to the Wyoming Medical Assistance and Services
Act and this act and partly funded by the federal government
pursuant to title XIX of the federal Social Security Act;

          (v) "Qualified long-term care insurance partnership
policy" means a policy that meets all of the following
requirements:

               (A) The policy covers an insured who was a
resident of Wyoming when coverage first became effective under
the policy;

               (B) The policy is a qualified long-term care
insurance policy as defined in section 7702B(b) of the Internal
Revenue Code of 1986 issued not earlier than the effective date
of the state plan amendment;

               (C) The director of the department certifies
that the policy meets the model regulations and requirements of
the national association of insurance commissioners model
specified in paragraph (5) of title VI, section 6021 of the
federal Deficit Reduction Act of 2005; and
                 (D)   If the policy is sold to an individual who:

                    (I) Has not attained age sixty-one (61) as
of the date of purchase, the policy provides compound annual
inflation protection;

                    (II) Has attained age sixty-one (61) but
has not attained age seventy-six (76) as of such date, the
policy provides some level of inflation protection; or

                    (III) Has attained age seventy-six (76) as
of such date, the policy may, but is not required to, provide
some level of inflation protection.

          (vi) "State plan amendment" means a state Medicaid
plan amendment made with the approval of the federal department
of health and human services that provides for the disregard of
any assets or resources in an amount equal to the insurance
benefit payments that are made to or on behalf of an individual
who is a beneficiary under a qualified long-term care insurance
partnership policy.

     42-7-103.   Wyoming long-term care partnership program
established.

     (a) In accordance with title VI, section 6021 of the
federal Deficit Reduction Act of 2005, there shall be
established the Wyoming long-term care partnership program, to
be administered by the agency with the assistance of the
department, to provide incentives for individuals to insure
against the costs of providing for their long-term care needs by
creating a mechanism for individuals to qualify for coverage of
the cost of their long-term care needs under Medicaid without
first being required to substantially exhaust their resources.

    (b)   The agency shall:

          (i) Before January 1, 2010, or as soon thereafter as
possible, make application to the federal department of health
and human services for a state plan amendment to establish that,
if an individual is a beneficiary of a long-term care
partnership program certified policy, the total assets an
individual owns and may retain under Medicaid and still qualify
for benefits under Medicaid at the time the individual applies
for long-term care benefits are increased by one dollar ($1.00)
for each one dollar ($1.00) of benefit paid out under the
individual's long-term care partnership program certified
insurance policy;

          (ii) Provide information and technical assistance to
the department on the department's role in assuring that any
individual who sells a qualified long-term care insurance
partnership policy receives training and demonstrates evidence
of an understanding of such policies and how they relate to
other public and private coverage of long-term care.

     (c) The department may not impose any requirement
affecting the terms of benefits of a policy under the
partnership program unless the department imposes such
requirement on long-term care insurance policies without regard
to whether the policy is covered under the partnership or is
offered in connection with such a partnership.

     (d) The issuers of qualified long-term care partnership
policies in Wyoming shall provide regular reports to the
secretary of the federal department of health and human
services, in accordance with federal regulations.

     (e) Reciprocity between the program and other state
programs shall be subject to the following:

          (i) Any individual who has purchased a partnership
policy in any participating state, who has received benefits
under the policy and who applies for Medicaid in a participating
state other than the one in which the policy was issued shall
receive an asset disregard in an equal dollar amount to the
benefits received under the policy;

          (ii) The asset disregard procedure and calculation
shall be the same for every individual with a partnership policy
who applies for Medicaid in the participating state, without
regard to whether the policy was purchased in another state or
the date the policy was purchased;

          (iii) An amount equal to the benefits received under
the partnership policy shall be exempt from Medicaid estate
recovery provisions; and

          (iv) If a person moves from the state in which the
person's partnership policy was issued, later applies for
Medicaid in another participating state and is determined to be
eligible using a partnership asset disregard, the partnership
asset disregard shall not be revoked upon eligibility
redetermination should the state subsequently decide to become
exempt from the reciprocity agreement.

    42-7-104.     Administration.

     (a) The agency and the department are authorized to adopt
rules to implement and administer the provisions of this act.

     (b) The agency and department shall comply with all
federal rules developed in accordance with title VI, section
6021 of the federal Deficit Reduction Act of 2005, regarding
data reporting, reciprocity with other states that develop long-
term care insurance partnership programs, and any other matters,
and shall have the authority to adopt regulations relative to
the provisions of any federal rules and their administration.

          CHAPTER 8 - NURSING CARE FACILITY ASSESSMENT ACT

    42-8-101.     Short title.

This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Wyoming
Nursing Care Facility Assessment Act."

    42-8-102.     Definitions.

    (a)    As used in this article:

          (i) "Account" means the nursing care facility
assessment account created under W.S. 42-8-103;

           (ii)   "Department" means the department of health;

          (iii) "Fiscal year" means the twelve (12) month
period beginning October 1 and ending September 30;

          (iv) "Medicaid" means as defined in W.S.
42-7-102(a)(iv);

          (v) "Medicare resident day" means a resident day
funded by the Medicare program, a Medicare advantage or special
needs plan or by the Medicare hospice program;

          (vi) "Net patient service revenue" means gross
inpatient revenues from services provided to nursing care
facility patients less reductions from gross inpatient revenue
resulting from an inability to collect payment of charges.
Inpatient care revenue excludes nonpatient care revenue such as
beauty and barber, vending income, interest and contributions,
revenues from the sale of meals and all outpatient revenues.
Reductions from gross revenue includes bad debts, contractual
adjustments, uncompensated care, discounts and adjustments and
other revenue deductions;

          (vii) "Nursing care facility" means a facility
providing nursing care, but does not include a facility solely
providing assisted living care, a facility solely providing
rehabilitative services or a facility solely providing a
combination of assisted living care and rehabilitative services;

          (viii) "Resident day" means a calendar day of care
provided to a nursing facility resident, including the day of
admission and excluding the day of discharge, provided that one
(1) resident day shall be deemed to exist when admission and
discharge occur on the same day;

          (ix) "Upper payment limit" means the limitation
established pursuant to 42 C.F.R. 447.272 that disallows federal
matching funds when state Medicaid agencies pay certain classes
of nursing care facilities an aggregate amount for services
furnished by that class of nursing care facilities that would
exceed the amount that would be paid under Medicare payment
principles.

    42-8-103.   Nursing care facility assessment account.

     (a)   The nursing care facility assessment account is
created.

     (b) The state treasurer shall invest amounts deposited
within the account in accordance with law, and all investment
earnings shall be credited back to the account.

    (c)    The account shall consist of:

          (i) Amounts collected or received by the department
from nursing care facility assessments under this article;

          (ii) All federal matching funds received by the
department as a result of expenditures made by the department
attributable to the account;

          (iii) Any interest or penalties levied in conjunction
with the administration of this article.
     (d) The account is created for the purpose of receiving
funds as specified in this section. Collected assessment funds
shall be used to secure federal matching funds available through
the state Medicaid plan, which shall be used to make Medicaid
payments for nursing care facility services which exceed the
amount of nursing care facility Medicaid rates, in the
aggregate, as calculated in accordance with the approved state
Medicaid plan in effect on October 1, 2010. The fund shall be
used exclusively for the following purposes:

          (i) To pay administrative expenses incurred by the
department or its agent in performing the activities authorized
by this article, provided that such expenses shall not exceed a
total of one percent (1%) of the aggregate assessment funds
collected in the fiscal year;

          (ii) To increase nursing care facility payments to
fund covered services to Medicaid beneficiaries within Medicare
upper payment limits, as negotiated with the department. The
upper payment limit for private nursing care facilities, state
government-owned facilities and nonstate government-owned
nursing facilities shall be calculated by the department using
the higher of the cost-based or prospective payment system
approach in accordance with the provisions of 42 C.F.R. 447.272;

          (iii) To repay the federal government any excess
payments made to nursing facilities if the state plan, after
approval by the federal centers for Medicare and Medicaid
services, is subsequently disapproved for any reason and after
the state has appealed. Nursing care facilities shall refund
the excess payments to the assessment account. The department
shall return the excess payments to the federal government and
nursing care facility providers in the same proportion as the
original financing. Individual nursing care facilities shall be
reimbursed based on the proportion of the individual nursing
care facility's assessment to the total assessment paid by
nursing care facilities. If a nursing care facility is unable
to refund payments as provided in this paragraph, the department
shall develop a payment plan and deduct amounts from future
Medicaid payments. The department shall refund the federal
government for the federal portion of those overpayments; or

          (iv) To make quarterly adjustment payments as
provided in W.S. 42-8-108.

    42-8-104.   Assessments.
     (a) Each nursing care facility shall pay the nursing care
facility assessment to the account in accordance with this
article.

     (b) The aggregated amount of assessments for all nursing
facilities during a fiscal year shall be the lesser of the
amount necessary to fund the provisions of this article or the
maximum amount that may be assessed pursuant to the indirect
guarantee threshold as established pursuant to 42 C.F.R.
433.68(f)(3)(i). The department shall determine the assessment
rate prospectively for the applicable fiscal year on a per-
resident-day basis, exclusive of Medicare resident days. The
per-resident-day assessment rate shall be uniform. The
department shall promulgate rules for facility reporting of non-
Medicare resident days and for payment of the assessment.

     (c) The department shall collect, and each nursing care
facility shall pay, the assessment under this section on a
quarterly basis. The initial payment shall be due not later
than forty-five (45) days after the state plan has been approved
by the federal centers for Medicare and Medicaid services unless
a later date is set by the department. Subsequent payments are
due not later than forty-five (45) days after the end of each
calendar quarter.

     (d) Nursing care facility operators may increase their
charges to incorporate the cost of paying the assessment under
this section, but shall not create a separate line-item charge
on the bill reflecting the assessment.

    42-8-105.   Approval of state plan.

     (a) The department shall seek necessary federal approval
in the form of state plan amendments in order to implement the
provisions of this article.

     (b) The department shall adopt rules and regulations
necessary to implement the provisions of this article or obtain
approval of the state plan amendments.

    42-8-106.   Multiple facilities.

If a person conducts, operates or maintains more than one (1)
nursing care facility licensed by the department, the person
shall pay the assessment for each nursing care facility
separately.
    42-8-107.    Penalties for failure to pay assessment.

     (a) If a nursing care facility fails to pay an assessment
when due under this article, there shall be added to the
assessment a penalty equal to five percent (5%) of the amount of
the assessment that was not paid when due. The penalty under
this section may be waived by the department for good cause.
Any payments after a penalty is assessed under this section
shall be credited first to unpaid assessment amounts rather than
to penalty or interest amounts, beginning with the most
delinquent installment.

     (b) In addition to the penalty under subsection (a) of
this section, the department may implement any of the following
remedies for failure of a nursing care facility to pay its
assessment when due under this article:

          (i) Withhold any medical assistance reimbursement
payments until the assessment is paid;

          (ii)   Suspend or revoke the nursing care facility's
license; or

          (iii) Develop a plan that requires the nursing care
facility to pay any delinquent assessment in installments.

    42-8-108.    Quarterly adjustment payments.

     (a) Each nursing facility is eligible for quarterly
adjustments as provided in this section.

     (b) The department shall determine the number of days that
nursing care facility services were paid for by the Wyoming
medical assistance program for the applicable annual cost
report. That number of days shall be utilized by the department
to determine the nursing care facility adjustment payment.
Adjustment payments shall be paid by the department on a
quarterly basis to reimburse covered Medicaid expenditures in
the aggregate within the upper payment limit. Each quarterly
payment shall be made not later than thirty (30) days after the
end of the calendar quarter with the initial adjustment payment
due not later than thirty (30) days after the approval by the
federal centers for Medicare and Medicaid services of the
state's plan reflecting facility adjustment payments.

     42-8-109. Discontinuation of the assessment and quarterly
adjustment payments.
     (a) The assessment imposed by this article shall be
discontinued if:

          (i) The state plan amendment reflecting the quarterly
nursing care facility adjustment payments under W.S. 42-8-108 is
not approved by the federal centers for Medicare and Medicaid
services. The department may modify the rate adjustment
provisions as necessary to obtain the federal centers for
Medicare and Medicaid services approval if such changes do not
exceed the authority and purposes of this article;

          (ii) The department reduces rates to a level less
than the rates effective on October 1, 2010 plus revenue
increases from the account, including matches by federal
financial participation;

          (iii) The department or any other state agency
attempts to utilize the money in the account for any use other
than permitted by this article;

          (iv) If federal financial participation to match
assessments under this article becomes unavailable under federal
law. In such case, the department shall terminate the
imposition of assessments beginning on the date the federal
statutory, regulatory or interpretive change takes effect.

     (b) If collection of the assessment is discontinued as
provided in this section, quarterly adjustment payments shall be
discontinued and any amount in the account shall be returned to
the nursing care facility from which the assessment was
collected on the same basis as it was collected.

          CHAPTER 9 - PRIVATE HOSPITAL ASSESSMENT ACT

    42-9-101.   Short title.

This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Wyoming
Private Hospital Assessment Act."

    42-9-102.   Definitions.

    (a)   As used in this chapter:

          (i) "Account" means the private hospital assessment
account created by W.S. 42-9-103;
         (ii)   "Department" means the department of health;

          (iii) "Fiscal year" means the twelve (12) month
period beginning October 1 and ending September 30;

          (iv) "Medicaid" means the medical assistance program
established by title XIX of the federal Social Security Act and
administered in this state by the department pursuant to the
Wyoming Medical Assistance and Services Act;

          (v) "Medicare cost report" means the annual hospital
cost report as determined by the centers for medicare and
medicaid services and as reported to the health care cost report
information system;

          (vi) "Net hospital patient revenue" means gross
hospital revenue as reported on the most recently filed
medicare cost report, excluding estimated nonhospital ancillary
revenue, multiplied by the hospital’s ratio of total net to
gross revenue. The department shall establish a procedure to
reconcile filed cost report information with information from
the settled cost report. If a hospital does not file a medicaid
cost report, the department shall establish a procedure to
determine what the hospital would have reported as net patient
hospital revenue if the hospital had filed a medicaid cost
report;

          (vii) "Private hospital" means those institutions
licensed by the department as hospitals which are not owned or
operated by the state or any city, town, county, special
district or other political subdivision of the state or local
government;

          (viii) "Quarterly adjustment payment" means the
payment made to private hospitals pursuant to W.S. 42-9-106;

          (ix) "Upper payment limit" means the applicable
limitation established pursuant to 42 C.F.R. 447.272, 42 C.F.R.
447.321 or as otherwise established by the centers for medicare
and medicaid services;

          (x) "Upper payment limit gap" means the amount
calculated annually by the department constituting the
difference between the applicable upper payment limit and
medicaid payments made subject to that limit in a fiscal year,
excluding any quarterly adjustment payments authorized by this
chapter;
          (xi) "Hospital services" means inpatient, outpatient
and other services provided by a private hospital or by
practitioners employed by, under contract with or in affiliation
with a hospital-affiliated professional service provider group.
Hospital services for purposes of this act include services
provided in a psychiatric residential treatment facility owned,
operated by or affiliated with a private hospital.

    42-9-103.   Private hospital assessment account.

    (a)   The private hospital assessment account is created.

     (b) The state treasurer shall invest amounts deposited
within the account in accordance with law and all investment
earnings shall be credited back to the account. Funds in the
account are continuously appropriated to the department for the
purposes specified in this section.

    (c)   The account shall consist of:

          (i) Amounts collected or received by the department
from private hospital assessments under this chapter;

          (ii) All federal matching funds received by the
department as a result of expenditures made by the department
pursuant to this chapter.

     (d) The account shall be used exclusively for the
following purposes:

          (i) To pay administrative expenses incurred by the
department or its agent in performing the activities authorized
by this chapter, provided that these expenses shall not exceed a
total of three percent (3%) of the aggregate assessment funds
collected in the fiscal year;

          (ii) To secure federal matching funds available
through the state medicaid plan as approved pursuant to W.S.
42-9-108, which shall be used to make quarterly adjustment
payments as provided by this chapter;

          (iii) To repay to the federal government any excess
payments received or made to private hospitals if the state
plan, after approval by the centers for medicare and medicaid
services, is subsequently disapproved for any reason and after
the state has exhausted all appeals. Private hospitals shall
refund any excess payments to the assessment account. If a
private hospital is unable to refund payments as provided in
this paragraph, the department shall develop a payment plan to
recoup deficient payments and accordingly deduct amounts from
future medicaid payments. The department shall refund the
federal government for the federal portion of those
overpayments;

          (iv) To refund assessments paid by private hospitals
for quarterly adjustment payments which were earned but not paid
by the department, but only after the payments authorized by
paragraphs (i) and (iii) of this section have been made.

    42-9-104.   Assessments.

     (a) Each private hospital shall pay a private hospital
assessment to the department in accordance with this section.
Hospitals owned or operated by the state or any city, town,
county, special district or other political subdivision of the
state or local government shall not be required to pay the
assessment required by this section.

     (b) The assessment due under this section shall be imposed
each fiscal year in an amount calculated as a uniform percentage
of each hospital's net patient revenue. The assessment rate
shall be determined by the department on a prospective basis and
shall be based on the percentage of net hospital patient revenue
needed to generate an amount not to exceed the nonfederal
portion of the upper payment limit gap plus the fee authorized
by W.S. 42-9-103(d)(i). In no event shall the assessment rate:

          (i) Exceed the indirect guarantee threshold amount
established by 42 C.F.R. 433.68(f)(3)(i) or other federal law;

          (ii) Exceed two percent (2%) of a hospital's net
patient revenue for the first fiscal year in which the hospital
is assessed;

          (iii) Increase by more than one percent (1%) of a
hospital's net patient revenue for each fiscal year following
the first fiscal year in which the hospital is assessed without
further approval by the legislature.

     (c) Unless otherwise determined by the department, the
department shall collect and each private hospital shall pay the
assessment required by this section on a quarterly basis, each
payment constituting twenty-five percent (25%) of the annual
assessment determined by the department. The initial payment
shall be due not later than forty-five (45) days after the state
plan has been approved by the centers for medicare and medicaid
services unless a later date is set by the department.
Subsequent payments are due not later than forty-five (45) days
after the end of each calendar quarter unless a later date is
set by the department.

     (d) If a private hospital ceases to operate as a hospital
or for any reason ceases to be subject to the assessment imposed
under this chapter, the assessment for the fiscal year in which
the cessation occurs shall be adjusted by multiplying the annual
assessment by a fraction, the numerator of which is the number
of days in the year during which the hospital is subject to the
assessment and the denominator of which is three hundred
sixty-five (365). Immediately upon ceasing to operate as a
hospital, or otherwise ceasing to be subject to this chapter,
the hospital shall pay the assessment for each quarter as
adjusted, to the extent not previously paid.

    42-9-105.   Penalties for failure to pay assessment.

     (a) If a private hospital fails to pay an assessment due
under this chapter, there shall be added to the assessment a
penalty equal to five percent (5%) of the amount of the
assessment that was not paid when due. The penalty under this
section may be waived by the department for good cause. Any
payments made after a penalty is assessed under this section
shall be credited first to unpaid assessment amounts rather than
to penalty amounts, beginning with the most delinquent
installment.

     (b) In addition to the penalty under subsection (a) of
this section, the department may implement any of the following
remedies for failure of a private hospital to pay its assessment
when due under this chapter:

          (i) Withhold any medicaid payments, including any
quarterly adjustment payments, until the assessment is paid; or

          (ii) Develop a plan that requires the private
hospital to pay any delinquent assessment in installments.

    42-9-106.   Quarterly adjustment payments.
     (a) To preserve the quality and improve access to private
hospital services, the department shall make quarterly
adjustment payments as set forth in this section.

     (b) Each private hospital that pays assessments under this
chapter and is eligible to receive medicaid payments shall be
eligible to receive quarterly adjustment payments as provided in
this section. The department shall distribute quarterly
adjustment payments in an amount up to but not to exceed the
applicable upper payment limit gap. The department shall
establish a uniform methodology by which to distribute quarterly
adjustment payments in compliance with applicable federal and
state medicaid laws and regulations.

     (c) Quarterly adjustment payments shall not be used to
offset any other payment by medicaid for hospital services to
medicaid beneficiaries, including without limitation any fee-
for-service, per diem, private hospital inpatient adjustment or
cost settlement payment.

     (d) No private hospital shall be guaranteed, expressly or
otherwise, that any quarterly adjustment payment will equal or
exceed the amount of the private hospital assessments due under
this chapter.

     (e) Monies made available by this chapter shall not be
used to replace other general revenues appropriated and funded
by the legislature or other revenues used to support medicaid.

     42-9-107. Discontinuation of the assessment and quarterly
adjustment payments.

     (a) The assessment imposed by this chapter shall be
discontinued if:

          (i) The state plan amendment reflecting the quarterly
adjustment payments authorized by this chapter is not approved
by the centers for medicare and medicaid services. The
department may modify the quarterly adjustment payment
provisions as necessary to obtain the centers for medicare and
medicaid services approval if the changes do not exceed the
authority and purposes of this chapter;

          (ii) Federal financial participation to match
assessments under this chapter becomes unavailable under federal
law. In this event, the department shall terminate the
imposition of assessments beginning on the date the federal
statutory, regulatory or interpretive change takes effect.

     (b) If collection of the assessment is discontinued as
provided in this section, quarterly adjustment payments shall be
discontinued and, after payment of all amounts under W.S.
42-9-103(d)(i) and (iii), any assessments remaining in the
account shall be returned to the private hospitals from which
the assessments were collected on the same basis as they were
collected.

    42-9-108.    Approval of state plan; rulemaking.

     (a) The department shall seek necessary federal approval
in the form of state plan amendments in order to continue to
implement the provisions of this chapter. The department shall
be deemed to satisfy this requirement by seeking approval for
the operation of an upper payment limit program that provides
for quarterly adjustment payments. While seeking federal
approval under this subsection, the department may modify
payment or qualification provisions as necessary to obtain the
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services approval if the
changes do not exceed the authority and purposes of this
chapter.

     (b) The department shall adopt rules and regulations
necessary to implement the provisions of this chapter and to
obtain approval of the state plan amendments.

    42-9-109.    Multiple facilities.

If a person conducts, operates or maintains more than one (1)
private hospital licensed by the department, the person shall
pay the assessment for each private hospital separately.

           CHAPTER 10 - WELFARE FRAUD PREVENTION ACT

                  ARTICLE 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS

    42-10-101.   Definitions.

    (a)   As used in this chapter:

          (i) "Identity information" includes the name, alias,
date of birth, address, social security number and other related
information of an applicant for or recipient of a public welfare
benefit;
          (ii) "Public welfare benefit" means as provided in
W.S. 42-2-102(a)(vii).

    42-10-102.   Enhanced identity authentication process.

Prior to awarding any public welfare benefit the department may
require an applicant to complete an identity authentication
process that confirms the applicant owns the identity presented
in the application. The identity authentication process under
this section shall consist of financial or personal questions
related to the applicant. The authentication process shall be
available for applicant interviews in person or by telephone.

    42-10-103.   Enhanced eligibility verification process.

     (a) Prior to awarding any public welfare benefit, and on a
quarterly basis after any benefit is awarded, the department
shall, to the extent practicable, determine the following
information as it relates to each applicant for or recipient of
a public welfare benefit:

Note: Effective 1/1/2027 this subsection will read as:

     (a) Prior to awarding any public welfare benefit, and at
the intervals specified in this section after any benefit is
awarded, the department shall, to the extent practicable,
determine the following information as it relates to each
applicant for or recipient of a public welfare benefit:

          (i) Earned and unearned income information maintained
by the United States internal revenue service;

          (ii) Weekly, monthly or quarterly reports of income
and unemployment insurance payment information maintained by the
department of workforce services;

          (iii) Income information maintained by the United
States social security administration;

Note: Effective 1/1/2027 this paragraph will read as:

          (iii) Income information maintained by the United
States social security administration, reviewed by the
department at every application and recertification period;
          (iv) Immigration status information maintained by the
United States citizenship and immigration services;

Note: Effective 1/1/2027 this paragraph will read as:

          (iv) Immigration status information maintained by the
United States citizenship and immigration services and verified
through the SAVE online service or other acceptable
documentation;

          (v) Death register information maintained by the
United States social security administration;

Note: Effective 1/1/2027 this paragraph will read as:

          (v) Death register information maintained by the
United States social security administration, reviewed by the
department not less than on a monthly basis;

          (vi) Prisoner information maintained by the United
States social security administration;

Note: Effective 1/1/2027 this paragraph will read as:

          (vi) Prisoner information maintained by the United
States social security administration, reviewed by the
department of family services at every application and
recertification period;

          (vii) Public housing and section 8 housing assistance
payment information;

Note: Effective 1/1/2027 this paragraph will read as:

          (vii) Public housing and section 8 housing assistance
payment information, reviewed by the department of family
services at every application and recertification period;

          (viii)   Fleeing felon, probation or parole violation
information;

Note: Effective 1/1/2027 this paragraph will read as:

          (viii) Fleeing felon, probation or parole violation
information, reviewed by the department of family services at
every application and recertification period;
          (ix) Wage reporting information maintained by states
contiguous to Wyoming;

          (x) Beneficiary records and earnings information
maintained by the United States social security administration
in the beneficiary and earnings data exchange system;

Note: Effective 1/1/2027 this paragraph will read as:

          (x) Beneficiary records and earnings information
maintained by the United States social security administration
in the beneficiary and earnings data exchange system, reviewed
by the department at every application and recertification
period;

          (xi) Earnings and pension information maintained by
the United States social security administration in the
beneficiary earnings exchange record system;

Note: Effective 1/1/2027 this paragraph will read as:

          (xi) Earnings and pension information maintained by
the United States social security administration in the
beneficiary earnings exchange record system, reviewed by the
department at every application and recertification period;

          (xii) Earnings and pension information maintained by
the Wyoming retirement system;

Note: Effective 1/1/2027 this paragraph will read as:

          (xii) Earnings and pension information maintained by
the Wyoming retirement system, reviewed by the department of
family services at every application and recertification period
and by the department of health upon the receipt of applicable
information from the Wyoming retirement system;

          (xiii) Employment information maintained by the
department of workforce services;

Note: Effective 1/1/2027 this paragraph will read as:

          (xiii) Employment information, reviewed by the
department at every application and recertification period;
          (xiv) Employment information maintained by the United
States department of health and human services in the national
directory of new hires;

Note: Effective 1/1/2027 this paragraph will read as:

          (xiv) Employment information maintained by the United
States department of health and human services in the national
directory of new hires, reviewed by the department of family
services at every application and recertification period;

          (xv) Supplemental security income information
maintained by the United States social security administration
in the social security income state data exchange system;

Note: Effective 1/1/2027 this paragraph will read as:

          (xv) Supplemental security income information
maintained by the United States social security administration
in the social security income state data exchange system,
reviewed by the department at every application and
recertification period;

         (xvi)     Veterans' benefits information;

          (xvii)    Child care services information maintained by
the department;

          (xviii) Utility payment information maintained by the
state under the low income home energy assistance program as
provided in W.S. 42-2-501;

          (xix) Emergency utility payment information
maintained by the state or local governmental entities; and

          (xx) Income and employment information maintained by
the department and the United States department of health and
human services office of child support enforcement.

     (b) The department is authorized to enter into agreements
with third-party vendors to obtain the following information
prior to awarding any public welfare benefit, and on a quarterly
basis after any benefit is awarded:

          (i) Information on public welfare benefits received
in other states maintained in any real time national database,
including the national accuracy clearinghouse;
          (ii) A nationwide public records data source of
physical asset ownership including real property, automobiles,
watercraft, aircraft, luxury vehicles or any other vehicle;

          (iii) A nationwide public records data source of
incarcerated individuals;

          (iv) A nationwide best available address and driver's
license data source to verify individuals are residents of
Wyoming;

          (v) A comprehensive public records database that
identifies potential identity fraud or identity theft which can
closely associate name, social security number, date of birth,
phone and address information; or

          (vi) National and local financial institutions, in
order to locate undisclosed depository accounts or verify
account balances of disclosed accounts.

     (c) In addition to the records specified in subsections
(a) and (b) of this section, the department may also consider
information from any database or source which is substantially
similar to or a successor of any record, database or information
specified under this section.

     (d) On not less than a quarterly basis, the department of
family services and department of health shall each make
available on their public websites all of the following data
from findings on noncompliance and fraud investigations,
provided the data is presented in the aggregate and does not
include confidential or personally identifying information:
[NOTE: This subsection will be effective 1/1/2027.]

          (i) The total number of public benefit cases
investigated for intentional program violations or fraud;

          (ii) The total number of public benefit cases
referred to the attorney general's office for prosecution;

         (iii)   Total improper payments and expenditures;

         (iv)    Total monies received;
          (v) Aggregate data concerning improper payments and
ineligible recipients as a percentage of those recipients
investigated and reviewed.

    42-10-104.   Case review process.

     (a) If the department finds a discrepancy or change in
circumstances as a result of the activities required by W.S.
42-10-102 or 42-10-103, the department shall review the case
using the following procedures:

          (i) If the discrepancy or change in circumstances
does not affect eligibility, the department shall take no
further action;

          (ii) If the discrepancy or change in circumstances
may affect eligibility, the department shall:

               (A) Promptly make a determination of the effect
of the discrepancy or change in circumstances on the eligibility
of the applicant or recipient; and

               (B) Provide written notice to the applicant or
recipient describing in detail the circumstances of the
discrepancy or change in circumstances, the manner in which the
applicant or recipient may respond and the consequences of
failing to take any action. The department shall give the
applicant or recipient an opportunity to explain the discrepancy
or change in circumstances.

          (iii) The applicant or recipient shall respond within
ten (10) business days from the date of the written notice of
the discrepancy or change in circumstances;

          (iv) If an applicant or recipient does not respond to
a notice of a discrepancy or change in circumstances as provided
in paragraph (ii) of this subsection and the department
determines that the discrepancy or change in circumstances
affects eligibility for a public welfare benefit, the department
shall provide a written decision of the intent to deny, reduce
the benefit or close the benefit case;

          (v) If an applicant or recipient responds to a notice
of a discrepancy or change in circumstances as provided in
paragraph (ii) of this subsection, the department shall
investigate and make a determination of whether or not the
discrepancy or change in circumstances has been resolved and
determine the applicant's or recipient's eligibility for public
welfare benefits. The decision of the department shall be
provided to the applicant or recipient in writing;

          (vi) A written decision of the department under this
section shall constitute a final decision of the department
subject to judicial review as provided in W.S. 16-3-114.

    42-10-105.   Referral of cases for investigation.

     (a) After review of a discrepancy or change in
circumstances under W.S. 42-10-104, if the department finds that
there is inadequate documentation or upon reasonable suspicion
that there is fraud, misrepresentation, identity theft or
another violation of law the department shall:

          (i) Refer the case to the fraud and recovery unit for
investigation, recovery of improper payments and collection of
civil penalties, if applicable and, if appropriate, referral to
prosecuting authorities for criminal prosecution;

          (ii) Refer the information to other agencies,
divisions or departments as appropriate for review of
eligibility in public programs.

     (b) To the extent the department encounters an individual
enrolled in Medicaid who the department has reason to believe is
not eligible for Medicaid, the department shall inform the
individual and the Wyoming Medicaid program of the reason the
department does not believe the individual is eligible.

    42-10-106.   Report.

Not later than November 30 of 2017, 2018 and 2020 the department
shall report to the governor and the joint labor, health and
social services interim committee on the effectiveness of the
eligibility verification system and the number of cases referred
under W.S. 42-10-105 including information on the outcome of the
cases, if available, and on the cost to the department of the
system.

    42-10-107.   Rulemaking authority.

The department shall promulgate rules necessary to implement
this chapter.
     42-10-108. Prohibition on self-attestation. Note: this
section is effective as of 1/1/2027.

     (a) Except as required under federal law, self-attestation
shall not be accepted for any of the following eligibility
factors without verification prior to enrollment in the medicaid
program:

         (i)    Income in excess of zero dollars ($0.00);

         (ii)    Residency;

         (iii)   Identity;

          (iv) Except for any presumptive eligibility period,
citizenship or immigration status.

     (b) The department shall not rely on self-attestation to
establish any medicaid eligibility factor unless expressly
required by federal law.

     42-10-109. Residency verification; monthly address checks;
multistate enrollment; monthly death record checks. Note: this
section is effective as of 1/1/2027.

     (a) As used in this section, "address change information"
means postal change of address data, state address change
databases or comparable systems.

     (b) On not less than a monthly basis, the department of
health shall review address change information to identify
potential changes in residency for medicaid recipients.

     (c) The department of health shall conduct monthly cross
checks of address change information against enrollment records
and shall initiate an eligibility redetermination when a change
in residency is indicated.

     (d) The department of health shall submit enrollment
information to any national database used to identify persons
enrolled in medicaid in multiple states. Implementation of this
subsection shall occur no later than October 1, 2029.

     (e) Not later than August 31 of each year, the department
of health shall submit a public report to the joint labor,
health and social services interim committee of the Wyoming
legislature, including:
          (i) The number of persons flagged through address
change information or out of state benefit activity;

          (ii) The number of persons removed from the medicaid
program due to enrollment in multiple states;

          (iii)   The estimated fiscal impact of this section.

     (f) On not less than a monthly basis, the department of
health shall receive and review information from the vital
statistics services and the social security administration
master death file to identify any deceased persons enrolled in
the medicaid program. Upon confirmation of death, the department
shall promptly remove the deceased person from the program.

     42-10-110. Retroactive medicaid eligibility; rulemaking;
reporting. Note: this section is effective as of 1/1/2027.

    (a)   As used in this section:

          (i) "Retroactive eligibility" means coverage for
services furnished prior to the month of application as
authorized by 42 U.S.C. § 1396a(a)(34);

          (ii) "Medicaid eligible population" means persons
eligible for medicaid under state or federal law.

     (b) Retroactive medicaid eligibility shall not extend more
than two (2) months prior to the month in which a completed
medicaid application is submitted.

     (c) This limitation applies only to initial applications
and shall not affect ongoing eligibility.

     (d) The department of health shall adopt rules necessary
to implement this section.

     (e) Not later than August 1 of each year, the department
of health shall submit a report to the joint labor, health and
social services interim committee of the Wyoming legislature,
including:

          (i)   The number of medicaid applications processed;

          (ii) The number of applicants denied retroactive
eligibility under this section; and
          (iii)   The estimated fiscal impact of the limitation.

     (f) This section shall be implemented not later than
January 1, 2027.

            ARTICLE 2 - WAIVER OF WORK REQUIREMENTS

     42-10-201. Prohibition on waiver of work requirements and
exemptions. Note: this section is effective as of 1/1/2027.

     (a) The department of family services shall not seek,
apply for, accept or renew any waiver of work requirements under
7 U.S.C. § 2015(o)(4) without first obtaining specific
authorization from the legislature. Such authorization shall be
provided in a duly enacted statute.

     (b) The department of family services shall not exercise
the state's option to provide any exemptions from the work
requirement under 7 U.S.C. § 2015(o)(6)(F), except for family
caregivers as defined in section 2 of the Recognize, Assist,
Include, Support and Engage Family Caregivers Act of 2017.

     CHAPTER 11 - PRIVATE GROUND AMBULANCE SERVICE PROVIDER
                         ASSESSMENT ACT

    42-11-101.    Short title.

This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Wyoming
Private Ground Ambulance Service Provider Assessment Act."

    42-11-102.    Definitions.

    (a)   As used in this chapter:

          (i) "Account" means the private ground ambulance
service provider assessment account created by W.S. 42-11-103;

          (ii) "Ambulance" has the same meaning as defined in
W.S. 33-36-102(a)(i)(A) and (B);

          (iii)   "Department" means the department of health;

          (iv) "Fiscal year" means the twelve (12) month period
beginning October 1 and ending September 30;
          (v) "Private ground ambulance service provider" means
any person operating a licensed ambulance service designed to
operate on the ground, which is not owned or operated by the
state or any city, town, county, special district or other
political subdivision of the state or local government;

          (vi) "License" and "licensed" means an ambulance
business license issued under W.S. 33-36-104 that is not expired
and has not been revoked or suspended;

          (vii) "Medicaid" means the medical assistance program
established by title XIX of the federal Social Security Act and
administered in this state by the department pursuant to the
Wyoming Medical Assistance and Services Act;

          (viii) "Net patient revenue" means all amounts
received by a private ground ambulance service provider licensed
under W.S. 33-36-104 for the provision of licensed, ground
ambulance services in the state of Wyoming. The department shall
establish a procedure for determining net patient revenue for
purposes of the assessment provided under W.S. 42-11-104;

          (ix) "Quarterly adjustment payment" means the
quarterly payments made to private ground ambulance service
providers that the department may establish and distribute
pursuant to W.S. 42-11-106;

          (x) "Rate enhancement" means Medicaid reimbursement
rate increases to private ground ambulance service providers, as
determined by the department and approved by the Centers for
Medicare and Medicaid Services;

          (xi) "Upper payment limit" means a limitation on
aggregate Medicaid payments to private ground ambulance service
providers, or another applicable class of Medicaid payees, as
established by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services;

          (xii) "Upper payment limit gap" means the amount
calculated annually by the department constituting the
difference between the applicable upper payment limit and
Medicaid payments made subject to that limit in a fiscal year,
excluding any payments authorized by this chapter.

     42-11-103. Private ground ambulance service provider
assessment account.
     (a) The private ground ambulance service provider
assessment account is created.

     (b) The state treasurer shall invest amounts deposited in
the account in accordance with law and all investment earnings
shall be credited back to the account. Funds in the account are
continuously appropriated to the department for the purposes
specified in this section.

    (c)   The account shall consist of:

          (i) Amounts collected or received by the department
from private ground ambulance service provider assessments under
this chapter;

          (ii) All federal matching funds received by the
department as a result of expenditures made by the department
pursuant to this chapter.

     (d) The account shall be used exclusively for the
following purposes:

          (i) To pay administrative expenses incurred by the
department or its agent in performing the activities authorized
by this chapter, provided that these expenses shall not exceed a
total of three percent (3%) of the aggregate assessment funds
collected in the fiscal year;

          (ii) To secure federal matching funds available
through the state Medicaid plan as approved pursuant to W.S. 42-
11-108, which shall be used to make quarterly adjustment
payments or to provide rate enhancements to private ground
ambulance service providers as provided by this chapter;

          (iii) To repay to the federal government any excess
payments received or made to private ground ambulance service
providers if the state plan, after approval by the Centers for
Medicare and Medicaid Services, is subsequently disapproved for
any reason and after the state has exhausted all appeals.
Private ground ambulance service providers shall refund any
excess payments to the assessment account. If a private ground
ambulance service provider is unable to refund payments as
provided in this paragraph, the department shall develop a
payment plan to recoup deficient payments and accordingly deduct
amounts from future Medicaid payments. The department shall
refund the federal government for the federal portion of those
overpayments;
          (iv) To refund assessments paid by private ground
ambulance service providers for payments which were earned but
not paid by the department, but only after the payments
authorized by paragraphs (i) and (iii) of this subsection have
been made.

    42-11-104.   Assessments.

     (a) Each private ground ambulance service provider shall
pay a private ground ambulance service provider assessment to
the department in accordance with this section.

     (b) The assessment due under this section shall be imposed
each fiscal year in an amount calculated as a uniform percentage
of each private ground ambulance service provider's net patient
revenue. The assessment rate shall be determined by the
department on a prospective basis and shall be based on the
percentage of private ground ambulance service provider net
patient revenue necessary to generate an amount not to exceed
the nonfederal portion of the upper payment limit gap plus the
fee authorized by W.S. 42-11-103(d)(i). If a rate enhancement is
paid to private ground ambulance service providers pursuant to
this chapter, the assessment rate shall include a uniform
percentage of each private ground ambulance service provider's
net patient revenue necessary to generate the nonfederal portion
of all enhanced rates paid under this chapter plus the fee
authorized by W.S. 42-11-103(d)(i). In no event shall
assessments or the assessment rate exceed the indirect guarantee
threshold amount established by 42 C.F.R. 433.68(f)(3)(i) or
other federal law.

     (c) Unless otherwise determined by the department, the
department shall collect and each private ground ambulance
service provider shall pay the assessment required by this
section on a quarterly basis, each payment constituting twenty-
five percent (25%) of the annual assessment determined by the
department. The initial payment shall be due not later than
forty-five (45) days after the state plan has been approved by
the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services unless a later
date is set by the department. Subsequent payments are due not
later than forty-five (45) days after the end of each calendar
quarter unless a later date is set by the department.

     (d) If a private ground ambulance service provider ceases
to operate as an ambulance service or for any reason ceases to
be subject to the assessment imposed under this chapter, the
assessment for the fiscal year in which the cessation occurs
shall be adjusted by multiplying the annual assessment by a
fraction, the numerator of which is the number of days in the
year during which the private ground ambulance service provider
is subject to the assessment and the denominator of which is
three hundred sixty-five (365). Immediately upon ceasing to
operate as an ambulance service provider, or otherwise ceasing
to be subject to this chapter, the private ground ambulance
provider shall pay the assessment for each quarter as adjusted,
to the extent not previously paid.

    42-11-105.    Penalties for failure to pay assessment.

     (a) If a private ground ambulance service provider fails
to pay an assessment due under this chapter, there shall be
added to the assessment a penalty equal to five percent (5%) of
the amount of the assessment that was not paid when due. The
penalty under this section may be waived by the department for
good cause. Any payments made after a penalty is assessed under
this section shall be credited first to unpaid assessment
amounts rather than to penalty amounts, beginning with the most
delinquent installment.

     (b) In addition to the penalty under subsection (a) of
this section, the department may implement any of the following
remedies for failure of a private ground ambulance service
provider to pay its assessment when due under this chapter:

          (i) Withhold any Medicaid payments, including any
quarterly adjustment payments or rate enhancements, until the
assessment is paid;

          (ii) Develop a plan that requires the private ground
ambulance service provider to pay any delinquent assessment in
installments;

          (iii) Suspend or revoke the private ground ambulance
service provider's license.

     42-11-106.   Payments to private ground ambulance service
providers.

     (a) Subject to W.S. 42-11-107, the initiation of
assessments under W.S. 42-11-104(c) and the federal approval
authorized in W.S. 42-11-108, the department shall make
quarterly adjustment payments to or implement rate enhancements
for private ground ambulance service providers as set forth in
this section.

     (b) Each private ground ambulance service provider that
pays assessments under this chapter and meets the eligibility
standards set by subsection (c) of this section shall be
eligible to receive quarterly adjustment payments as provided in
this section. The department shall distribute quarterly
adjustment payments in amounts up to but not to exceed the
applicable upper payment limit gap. The department shall
establish a uniform methodology by which to distribute payments
in compliance with applicable federal and state Medicaid laws
and regulations.

     (c) Unless otherwise prohibited by federal law, only
private ground ambulance service providers who meet all of the
following requirements shall be eligible to receive a quarterly
adjustment payment authorized in subsection (b) of this section:

          (i) Private ground ambulance service providers who
provide ground ambulance services to Medicaid beneficiaries;

          (ii) Private ground ambulance service providers who
provide ground ambulance services to Medicare beneficiaries;

          (iii) Private ground ambulance service providers who
accept as full payment for ground ambulance services any
payments made under Wyoming's worker's compensation system; and

         (iv)   Private ground ambulance service providers who:

               (A) Are network providers for all insurers
offering private health benefit plans in this state who maintain
not less than a twenty percent (20%) share of the state's
individual or small group health insurance market; or

               (B) Have made a bonafide and reasonable offer to
become a network provider to all of the insurers identified in
subparagraph (A) of this paragraph by offering to accept as
network provider reimbursement not more than double the Medicaid
reimbursement rate for relevant medical services. The offer
required by this subparagraph may be higher to the extent the
private ground ambulance service provider demonstrates to the
department that the actual cost of providing relevant medical
services plus six percent (6%) of the actual cost is an amount
higher than double the Medicaid reimbursement rate for the
relevant medical services.
     (d) To the extent rate enhancements are approved by the
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services and subject to the
collection of assessments under W.S. 42-11-104(b), the
department shall provide rate enhancement payments to private
ground ambulance service providers consistent with applicable
federal and state requirements.

     (e) Quarterly payments or rate enhancements shall not be
used to offset any other payment by Medicaid for ground
ambulance services to Medicaid beneficiaries, including without
limitation any fee-for-service, per diem, adjustment or cost
settlement payments.

     (f) No private ground ambulance service provider is
guaranteed, expressly or otherwise, that quarterly adjustment
payments or rate enhancements will equal or exceed the amount of
private ground ambulance service provider assessments due under
this chapter.

     (g) Monies made available by this chapter shall not be
used to replace other general revenues appropriated and funded
by the legislature or other revenues used to support Medicaid.

    42-11-107.   Discontinuation of the assessment and payments.

     (a) The assessments imposed by this chapter shall be
discontinued or not allowed if:

          (i) The state plan amendment or other agreement with
the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services reflecting the
payments authorized by this chapter is not approved by the
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. The department may
modify the payment or qualification provisions as necessary to
obtain the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services approval
if the changes do not exceed the authority and purposes of this
chapter;

          (ii) Federal financial participation to match
assessments under this chapter becomes unavailable under federal
law. In this event, the department shall terminate the
imposition of assessments beginning on the date the federal
statutory, regulatory or interpretive change takes effect.

     (b) If the collection of assessments is discontinued as
provided in this section, payments or rate enhancements under
this chapter shall be discontinued and, after payment of all
amounts under W.S. 42-11-103(d)(i) and (iii), any assessments
remaining in the account shall be returned to the private ground
ambulance service providers from which the assessments were
collected on the same basis as they were collected.

     (c) If the department is collecting assessments for both
quarterly adjustment payments and rate enhancements and both
collections are not discontinued, the department shall continue
to maintain the account as required by this chapter for the type
of assessment that continues to be collected.

    42-11-108.   Approval of state plan; rulemaking.

     (a) The department shall seek necessary federal approval
in the form of state plan amendments or otherwise in order to
implement the provisions of this chapter. The department shall
be deemed to satisfy this requirement by seeking approval for
the operation of an upper payment limit program that provides
for quarterly adjustment payments, by seeking approval for rate
enhancements, or both. While seeking federal approval under
this subsection, the department may modify payment or
qualification provisions as necessary to obtain the Centers for
Medicare and Medicaid Services approval if the changes do not
exceed the authority and purposes of this chapter.

     (b) The department shall adopt rules and regulations
necessary to implement the provisions of this chapter.

    42-11-109.   Multiple ambulance services.

If a person conducts, operates or maintains more than one (1)
private ground ambulance service provider licensed by the
department, the person shall pay the assessment for each private
ground ambulance service provider separately.

 CHAPTER 12 -CITIZENS AND QUALIFIED ALIENS STATUS VERIFICATION
                          FOR WELFARE

     42-12-101. Definition of citizens who are eligible for
public assistance. Note: this section is effective as of
1/1/2027.

     (a) Unless required by federal law, no person who is not a
United States citizen or national of the United States shall be
eligible to receive food assistance through the supplemental
nutrition assistance program, unless that individual meets the
definition of a qualified alien pursuant to 8 U.S.C. § 1641(b).
     (b) No person who is not a United States citizen or
national of the United States shall be eligible to receive
medical assistance through medicaid, unless that person meets
the definition of an eligible alien pursuant to 42 U.S.C. §
1396b(v) and meets the definition of a qualified alien pursuant
to 8 U.S.C. § 1641(b).

     (c) No person who is not a United States citizen or
national of the United States shall be eligible to receive
assistance through the personal opportunities with employment
responsibilities (POWER) program, unless that person meets the
definition of a qualified alien pursuant to 8 U.S.C. § 1641(b).

     42-12-102. Verification of citizenship or eligible alien
status. Note: this section is effective as of 1/1/2027.

     (a) The department of family services shall be required to
verify that a person is eligible to participate in the
supplemental nutrition assistance program during enrollment and
eligibility recertification by verifying citizenship or eligible
alien status by using the United States citizenship and
immigration services' systematic alien verification for
entitlements (SAVE) online service or requiring the person to
provide an acceptable form of proof of citizenship or eligible
alien status, including but not limited to certified birth
certificates, United States passports and United States customs
and immigration services documentation.

     (b) The department of health shall be required to verify
that a person is eligible for medicaid during enrollment and
eligibility redetermination by verifying citizenship or eligible
alien status using the SAVE online service or requiring the
person to provide an acceptable form of proof of citizenship or
eligible alien status, including but not limited to, certified
birth certificates, United States passports and United States
customs and immigration services documentation.

     (c) The department of family services or other applicable
agency shall be required to verify that a person is eligible for
the POWER program during enrollment and eligibility
redetermination by verifying citizenship or eligible alien
status using the SAVE online service or requiring the person to
provide an acceptable form of proof of citizenship or eligible
alien status, including but not limited to, certified birth
certificates, United States passports and United States customs
and immigration services documentation.
     (d) The department of family services shall submit to the
United States department of agriculture information concerning
any assistance unit member for whom it is unable to verify
eligible alien status.

     (e) The department of health shall submit to the United
States department of health and human services information
concerning any person member for whom it is unable to verify
eligible alien status.

     42-12-103. Referral of illegal aliens to law enforcement.
Note: this section is effective as of 1/1/2027.

The department of health and department of family services shall
submit to the appropriate law enforcement authorities, including
but not limited to the United States department of homeland
security, information concerning any household member or
assistance unit member who it is determined by the applicable
department while applying the requirements of this title to be
an unlawfully present alien, regardless of whether such
household member or assistance unit member is applying to
participate in a public assistance program, including but not
limited to, the supplemental nutrition assistance program or
medicaid.

     42-12-104. Counting of ineligible alien income in
determination of benefits under the supplemental nutrition
assistance program. Note: this section is effective as of
1/1/2027.

The entire income and financial resources of any individual
rendered ineligible for participation in the supplemental
nutrition assistance program under 7 U.S.C. § 2015(f) shall be
considered in determining the eligibility and benefit allotment
of the household of which such individual is a member.

     42-12-105. Reasonable opportunity periods for noncitizens
applying for medicaid. Note: this section is effective as of
1/1/2027.

     (a) The department of health shall adhere to the following
requirements regarding the reasonable opportunity period for
verification of United States citizenship or eligible alien
status for medicaid:
          (i) When an applicant's status cannot be verified
through available data sources, the department shall provide
only a single reasonable opportunity period, consistent with the
minimum period required under federal law, for the applicant to
provide verification;

          (ii) Medicaid coverage may only be provided
provisionally during the reasonable opportunity period;

          (iii) Failure to submit acceptable documentation
within the reasonable opportunity period required under federal
law shall result in denial or termination of medicaid
eligibility, subject to required notice;

          (iv) No additional reasonable opportunity period
shall be granted to any applicant for medicaid who has
previously been denied eligibility at any time due to a failure
to verify citizenship or eligible alien status.

     42-12-106. Citizenship data collection and presumptive
eligibility integrity, medicaid. Note: this section is effective
as of 1/1/2027.

     (a) The department of health shall require a field for
citizenship or eligible alien status on all presumptive
eligibility applications. The department shall require
hospitals, clinics and other qualified entities authorized to
conduct presumptive eligibility determinations to collect and
transmit attestations of citizenship or eligible alien status to
the department. No presumptive eligibility application shall be
approved unless the applicant certifies that they are a United
States citizen, United States national, or alien eligible for
medicaid pursuant to 42 U.S.C. § 1398b(v) and W.S. 42-12-101(b).

    (b)   The department of health shall:

          (i) Beginning not later than April 1, 2027, require
each hospital that accepts medicaid to include a provision on
its patient admission or registration form for the patient or
the patient's representative to state or indicate whether the
patient is a United States citizen or lawfully present in the
United States or is not lawfully present in the United States;

          (ii) Beginning not later than April 1, 2027, require
each hospital that accepts medicaid to inform a patient, at the
time this information is collected, that any submission made on
an admission or registration form will not affect patient care,
as required by federal law;

          (iii) Beginning with the calendar year ending on
December 31, 2027 and each calendar year thereafter, require
that each hospital shall submit an annual report to the
department of health within thirty (30) days after the end of
each calendar year which reports the total deidentified number
of hospital admissions and emergency department visits within
the previous calendar year, disaggregated based on whether the
patient or the patient's representative indicated that he or she
was or was not a citizen of the United States or lawfully
present in the United States or declined to answer together with
other information required by the department;

          (iv) Beginning on April 1, 2028 and each April 1
thereafter, submit a report to the governor and the joint labor,
health and social services interim committee, which includes the
number of total deidentified hospital admissions and emergency
department visits for the previous calendar year, disaggregated
based on weather the patient or patient's representative
reported that the patient was or was not a citizen of the United
States or lawfully present in the United States or declined to
answer. The report shall also describe information relating to
the costs of uncompensated care for aliens who are not lawfully
present in the United States, the impact of uncompensated care
on the cost or ability of hospitals to provide services to the
public, hospital funding needs and other related information.
The report shall also contain information based on the
hospital's presumptive eligibility applications that are
submitted to the department by participating providers,
including the number of persons determined to be presumptively
eligible for medicaid in the prior calendar year, the proportion
of the persons presumptively eligible for medicaid who were
verified as eligible for medicaid and the proportion of the
persons presumptively eligible for medicaid who were determined
to be ineligible for medicaid;

          (v) Adopt rules relating to the format and
information to be contained in quarterly reports and the
acceptable formats for hospitals to use in requesting
information regarding a patients immigration status on hospital
admission or registration forms.

